1.
.~ntroduction I

HISTORY OF MAJOR STRJCTUAAL CONSERlATION

•

HI

..-

The Taj Mehal. one of the

finest garden tombS

in the

world stanas on the bank of yamuna at Agr a and it was built by the Mugha:
E.tnparor Stlshjahan to enshrine the mortal remains of Arjumand B9.nu entitlE
Mumta-z Mahal, the empres.s whom the emperor loved imnensely.

land

was given by R3.ja Jai Singh,

The piece of

grandson~ Raja Man Singh and the

lofty residences from the crown lands in exchange.

e mt:eror gave him

The

construction of the tomb was begun in 1631 A.D. and it was completed in
1643 A.D. According to the court historians the project was completed in

about twelve years at

a cost of 5,000,00 rU};ees under the superintendeno

of M:lkramat !<han and Mir Abdul I<arim the Sup!rintendent of Buildings
(oarugha) incharge of

buildings at Agra •

the construction was ustad Ahmed Lahori.
instruction from

..

EadShahnama

The architect responsible for

Mulla Abdul Hamid Lahori. under

Shahjahan has recorded a detailed

(Appendix - A).

history of Taj in

The account of Taj is also given by Abdur

Rahm:in in his book Mirata _ Aftab - Numa (Appendix _ B).
The symmetry of deSign
everlasting effect.

combined with

The Taj is situated

a1

vastness produce a unique

the other end of'the garden ir.

the centre of marble terrace between two buildings of identical design, a

mosque on the west and a Jamat Khana (assembly hall) on the east.

Terrace

~ four domed minerets having four storeyed. The mBsoleum has vaulted

arched recesses 1n the facade and smaller arched receSSeS in two storeyed

on the 61&8.

With four

bulbous placed in the

ance.

chhattris on the corners the double dome slight

centre of the lofty drum has a very pleasing appear.

All these components are perfect ly mlaneed.

The core of the masolE

is made of bricks with lime mortar faced with white marble veneer.

The wh;

surface of the marble inside and out4ide is full of pietra dura ornament_

atian delicate traceries

of marble railings and beautiful, inscriptions iT

black marble on white surface.

"All these different parts have been combined to form a perfectly
balanced composition of great architectura~ merit in itself: at once the
most famouB and most .beautiful of all the monu~nts made by the hand of man
incomparably designed like a palace and finished like a Jewel'. But what
has made the Taj' milk white amongst its dark cypresses' astoundingly
beautiful and dream like is the chaste marble".
Contd ••• 2 ••

