The Court Historian MullAh Abdul Hamid Lahor! mentions that the

toundaticn of this great 1ftOl1..1JD&nt was laid i.n 16)2. The inscriptions

OIl

the great apse facing west on th. eouthem wall ot the eenotaPl chamber and
on the main gateway bear the dates at

1046

A.H. (1636 A.D.), 1048 A.H. (1638 A.D

ani 1057 A.H. (1646 A.D.) respectively, denoting preeswnabl1' the year at

completion

o~

the various parts on which the inSCriptions ocour. 1'be

author gives a v.1d1d description ot the main
but his account is . . . contined
!eatl~O) 1

~

to the archit.ectUMl AM riecoratd.w

all the relevant; iJ1formatian that can be gathered from the

Badshqhnama ls, first, that the tOUhiations were taken to the subsaU water
level, second, that the masonry belmt the ground is stone-in-1:1.me

am

th1.rd,

that. the platform above grouni is of brlck-in-morlar faced. with marble veneer.
HISTORY OF tA.AJOR REPAIRSt-- In the histo17 of repairs, the problem of the

leakage of the dome has plagued i:mnedia t.ely after the canpletion of the
mausoleum.

The

earliest reterence to leakage in the dane reported in a

letter fran Aurangzeb to Emperor Shahjahan dated 1652 AD,
after the canpl.etdan

dome of the

h~

rain7 season arxl

or

the mausoleum.

not long

Prince Aurangzeb pointed out, "the

tanb 1eaked at two places towards the north during the
80

also the four sem:l.e.daaed arches, many at the galleries

on the second etorey, the tour smaller domes, the tour northem canparlments
and seven arched UDierground chambers, which have developed cracks.

Jl.tring

the rains last year the terrace over the main dome also leaked in two or
three places.

It has been repaired. but it remains to be seen during the

ensuing rainy season how far
domes of the

mosque and the

made water Ught.

the operations have proved auccess1\11.
Jam;at

The

Ihana leaked during the rains ani were

The master builders are of the opinicn that if' the roor

or the seconi storey is reopened and dismantled

am

treated afresh ,dth

concrete over which halt a yard ot mortar grout 15 laid, the sem:1.-daned
arches, the galleries and the smaller daDea will proba'b:q become water

contd••••••••• 3

