.. 4 In 1009 a Committee was appointed t.o supervise the repairseo TaJ and
Akbar's Tanb at Sikandara and upto 1814 a lakh ot Rupees was spent.
A later account at repairs carried out to the structure of the TaJ
Mahal bujlding appears in the proceedings of the

at. Hon'ble Governor General

in Council in the General Department. on the 4th December 1823. wherein it
has been mentioned that Captain Taylor was appointed b7 Government in the
year 1810 to execute the repairs to the Taj J.-1ahal at Agra in the maImer an:l

extem

to the

suggested b7 Col. Hyde, the acting Cbiet EngLnear. Col. Hyde

!Stated that "Several.

b0d7

or

or

the marble slabs which compoaecl the coating of the

the buildi rag are broken and maDT or the omamants or inlaid co1oured

stone have tumbled Q,lt. Instead at filling up the _canciea in the
ornaments with coloured chunam I abould recanmem that original pieces at
ooloured stones should be insert.ed.

as.7.CXYJ/- wlll

be abundant tor this

purpose."
In November 1814, Captain Tq10r reported that the repairs, ae tar

as authorised b7 the Government. had been canpleted. The wale of the
outer surface of the body or the Taj had been

tho~

repa1.red

am

c1eaned,

the atones which had fallen ou.t replaced and the mosaic work completely

renewed.

~~~'lJ~V7 rains

o£ 1822 the omamental work carried out

by Capt. Tay-lor on the exterior body or the TaJ was damaged though it had

been repaired onl¥ eight years since.

local agenlis at Agra to the Board
They stated that the original

The mat.ter was reported by the
\'4'.~ ..

or Revenue in the&..western Provinces.

decorations were inlaid in coloured stones

whereas Capt. Taylor had used ao1oured chunem; moreover, thoy pointed out

that whereas the 3aints

or

the marble slabs

or

the minarets bad formerly

contained. pieces of black stone, they were replaced by coloured mortar.
This shows that Col. Hyde's rccommerxlat1ons with regard to the tilling up

or

recesses on tho bod1'

or

the Taj with marble were not carried out. bY'

Capt.. Taylor.

contd ••••••• 5

