-- 5 rIo aubstantJ.a1 repairs appear to have

been undert:.a!~Qn atter tJds

periCAl wltil 1864 when Dr. Hurray, Inspectol'-General
:lddrc~goJ

~!agiBt,ratc

the

Lhe following terms.

or Hospitals,

N.:i.P.

Collector or Agre on the 15th of Sept;erooor in

and

"The mosaic work bas been much injured particularly

duri~

the r·;utinyt great rrumber of flowers have been picked out, their pla.ce haa been
filled by lime ani painted 1..ad.tatioo of the original fiowera but the effect.
is abominable.

The nowens in the octagonal. roaD are a good deal injured

by renewal. and by subsidence

ot the Nortb-East wall cracJdng the marble,

but the flowers inthe w8titulea are little injured."

l'be estimate o! Dr. .ilrra

for replacing the fiowers in t.he vestibulee are little inJured..'.

'lb. estimate

of Dr. r-!urray tor replacing the fiowera and certain other repairs to broken
marble in the wall amounted to
Beside., the replacement.

b.5,9f1J/-.
or

the fiowrs mentioned above. there seens

to have been need for other repairs.

!his tact, became apparent in the

CeJUrM

of the noxt 10 years Mhen Hr• .uexan:1eJ:' kecutl" EhgLneer, Agra, was asked

to carry out repaira amounting to b.70.926/...
In 1876 the masoleum was enterested to Public Works Department.

1n

C~c~ber

1,'03

~

Curzon, theD ViC_raJ" at Ind1a, vis1tod the

and since then, the Taj has received cOll.Stant care

am

attention.

raj,

Under Lorj

Curzon' s orders, not onl.y the main masoleum but also the buildings in the
fore and outer court received attention.

The marble lining

or

the 90!fit cf

tho dome was restored and the fall of marble plece3 from the dome W:lS Arr:>~~l:' !,
The

floor

or

the dalans were repJ.aeed as the orlgina.l noar was

beyond ropair. l'he garden was relaid with lawns.

da~a[erj

Earlier 1 thad

dansely plante4 different varitles of flowering and fruit bearing
trees as bouae out by the earier drawing and phoGographs.
The Gazetteer of Agra records that in first five years· eve!
•• 1,27000/- were spent in repairs...... The affairs of Taj are
now entrusted to a Committee fGrmed by the Commissioner, C~llectol
Judge and Executive Engineers assisted by the Super1n~endent of
Govt. Garden". This was the status p.sltion of Taj in 1905.

