An off-shoot of light pollution or over illuminatIon in
and around the monument as well as on roads leading to Taj is
the observation and general subjective feeling of Agra
residents and visi tors that night view of the Taj has
qualitatively gone down. Taj in moonlight does not appear to
be as ehterial and shining as it used to be. Even if it needs
proving by experimental data, it is worth considering the
point that this public opinion may be a consequence of
overall increease in the amount of light in the night
atmospher round the monuments themselves due to reflection of
large quantity of light that in its turn is substantialy and
poseti vely affected by the increased SPM in the air in and
around Agra in partic~lar and TTZ in general~
It is simply amfzing that everyone so far has ignored
the fact of significant increase in the amount of road and
other lights in and around Taj while evaluating the
impression of deterioration in visual quality of the
monument. Because of this increased light, coupled with the
background reflected light of near by sources, the quality of
v~s~on under moon light would naturaly get seriously affected
in the same manner as moon itself, when seen today in major
cities the world over, appears more like an intruder than
I(

part of that nature in which these cities exist. It may be
pointed out that astronomical observatories like the one at
Nainital are
being seriously hampered
by
reflected
atmospheric light. It is obvious that SPM too in this context
would have an important role to play. These facts are, known
to all except, apparently, to the high ups in the Ministry of
Tourism!
Light pollution in Agra is an aspect which has not
attracted that serious attention which it deserves from the
point of view of viewing Taj during full moon nights round
the year. This aspect of pollution should be 1ecognised and
paid attention to. There is no ether way of looking at public
discontent as, on this count, the ordinary people would not
analyse but go by their own comparison of the past and
present or what is popularly called the sixth sense.
In other words, it is ideas of the Ministry of Tourism
and ITDC that today emerge as not only serious violations of
conservational norms but also serious potential danger to the
normal prolongation of the existance of the monuments
themselves with the ASI lying prostrate and acting as a
serious colaborator and accompalice enhancing the dangers to
the monuments that are under ASI custody.~

