-b7-

~rj

2.

cipal Recommendations

1. Establish and promptly implement mechanisms for local
participation in setting goals and carrying out Agra Heritage area
plans.

2. Take immediate measures to prevent worsening conditions
within the heritage region, including living conditions for the
people as well as the state of the monuments. While priority must
be given tD the World Heritage Sites, other historic places within
the region require early attention.
3. A number of agencies and institutions with multiple
responsibilities and overlapping authority are concerned with the
region. The Panel urges the establishment of an Agra Heritage
Region coordinating authority with power to make final decisions
and to monitor matters affecting the integrity of the heritage
sites and their environments. As choice of pevple remains the
critical variable, its members must be carefully chosen, it must
~ve continuity and ~c must be presided over by a person of stature
and vision.

4. Create an Agra Heritage Foundation wi th commi tt-ees in
several countries to raise [t!:1d~ froin individuals and non-go':ernmental entities in s~pport of hg~a He~itage improvements.
Donations to the Foundation should be accorded tax-exempt st.:ttus.

5. Give priority in gcvernment funding to addressing the
water, transport, pollution and power problems of the city area as
a prerequisite to creating an adequate environment for the heritage
sites. This will require establishment of a comprehensive regional
plan and a spatial development strategy which may include satellite
towns and growth corridors.
and

documentation

6. Carefully complete archaeologica~ exploration of the t-lehtab
-4gh site across the Yamuna from the Taj Hahal. If appropriate,
create an historically accurate reconstruction on the site thus
providing a moonlight park as the basis for development of cultural
anq artistic space within the planned Taj National Park. Establish
guidelines for further development of the trans-Yamuna area.
7. Revive Taj Ganj and establish its central position within
an extended and enhanced program of craft demonstrations and
production. Link this resource with a varied and carefully
considered program of public presenta tions about the historical
heritage of Agra. These programs will be an important element in
attracting more and longer-term visitors to Agra.

