-6'9-

4.

These deficiencies were compensated for by the excellent
presentations made by the Agra Commissioner. and by the senior
officers from relevant disciplines who met with the Panel. The
Panel would like to record its appreciation to all who gave so
unstintingly of their knowledge and their time. We also wish to
incorporate by means
of
this
reference
the
detailed
and
illuminating note prepared by the Commissioner as an Appendix to
this report.
As an important first principle, the Panel was agreed from the
outset that no vision for the future of Agra could be meaningful
unless -the people of Agra were actively involved at all stages.
While the monuments are of global significance, their future will
only be secure within a civic order which provides first for the
well-being of the people of Agra and imbues them with an
appropriate sense of pride in the heritage of the city.
Thus, the vision for Agra which the Panel believes will best
~erve the World Heritage &ites is one which
~Ltizen5-of Agra~
While officials have

is shared by tr.e

heavy responsibilities
or shaping and implementing critical aspects of that vision, local
leaders,
non-governmental
organizations,
private
sector
entrepreneurs, educational and cuI tural insti tutions and those
concerned with tourism and the arts must bear the major part of the
burden if a vision for Agra in the year 2020 is to become reality.
In 6 h a Fin g t h 2. t vi 5 i c. r. , the Far: c 1 u r 9 e s t h it t the h :_.:i t c ric 3.1
and cultural intec;ri~y of tne region be D,ssigned chc hi (lhcst
priority. Hithout the capacity to maintain and share an aut!lc!1tic
experience ',.;hich :l::-aws upon ttle ric:'Jles£ of the regio~, the
principal attraction which c::ings visitcrs to Agra t,rill be eroded.
This requires the clarity of v~9ion and the cou!:"age to re~;j 3t
pressures towards synthetic re-creations and additions to the
monuments which pander to transient popular tastes. An example is
the current proposal to light the Taj ~!ahal at night. The reaction
of the Panel was unanimous: not only would the character of the
monument be altered; such an installation could severely damage the
structure physically. The interests of the region, including the
,conomic interests of the people, will be best served through time
by rigorous adherence to the highest standards in conservation.
The Panel was reminded that the Governments of both India and
the united States are signatories to the World Heritage Convention
and that both take their obligations seriously, domestically and
internationally. The future designation of Agra as a World Heritage
City could be an appropriate move towards establishing and
implementing a more holistic program of development for the region.
To enhance the visitor experience broader infrast=uctural
needs must be addressed. co~~u~ications and transport must be made
more rellable ilnd convenient. 11el rket ing technj ques which convey lhe
richness of the l\.gra experience beyond the three major monuments
must be evolved.

