5.

-70-

~isitor centers and guides must be brought to a high standard
and carefully supervfsed. Basic amenities such as rest rooms, safe
water, catering services and protection from exploitation must be
assured. Such organizational arrangements can only result from
close, mutually beneficial, collaboration between th~ go~ernment
authorities, the private sector, non-Qovernmenta.1 organ~zat~on9 and
the local community·

The Panel recognized the need to insure that responsible
institutions have the authority to coordinate overal~ direction of
regional, multi-faceted activities with a minimum of duplication or
delay. While study of alternative approaches may be appropriate,
the panel believes that, because of the multiple responsibilities
and overlapping jurisdictions of concerned agencies, establishment
of an Agra ll~ritage Region coordinating authority is warranted.
The Panel also urges creation of a non-governmental body such
an Ag-ra Heritage Foundation,
with private
funding, from Indians and from abroad. Contribut~ons to such a
Foundation should be tax exempt to the donor. Such a body with
assured independence could playa constructive and reinforcing role
"hile providing long-term c-orrtinui ty too often lacking \-lhere
official policy dictates frequent transfers of key officials.
Observations concerning such a foundation are appended.

as

Population growth constitutes a ~ajor factor ~n futu~e
planning. Sustained high rates of U~t3~ a~d regional pcpulation
growth will likely lead to a furthe!: doubling of the regJ on" S
population by 202~. Agra City, nc'..; est; rr;ated to have n\ore than 1. J
million citizens must plan to provide =or more than 3 million bv
2"20. Such rapid growth is a potentially d~-stabiliz.2.na !<lCt0~
affecting the future development cf l~gI.·a ~s a heritage city.
Indeed, it demands that a "Second Agra" must be build within the
next three decades. Until the basic needs of the people can be met,
the capacity of the civil authorities to undertake other
development and conservation work will be severely constrained.
The Agra Commissioner noted that the problems of the city are
monumental. Water, pollution, energy, transportation are all
~itical. As long as the people do not feel that these issues are
!ing successfully addressed, they are unlikely to be sympathetic
to the commitment of finite resources for heritage conservation.
Indeed, the closing of two thermal power plants to reduce pollution
near the heritage sites created an understandable negative backlash
among those whose economic well-being was adversely affect~d.
Water is inadequate both in quantity and quality. The River
Yamuna, source of virtually all of Agra s supply, becomes a !:e\.;er
south of New Delhi. Despite plans for improvement and agreecents to
cost sharing arrangements between the Cente~ and the State, funds
have not been forthcoming. Sewage, drain~ge, sanitation and waste
disposal all constitute major demands requiring attention and
resources. At pr.esent, the city does not have the machinery
required to dispose of its solid wil3te.
I

