-7/-

The location of a crematorium upstream from the Taj Mahal was
noted as was the construction by the Agra Development Authority of
a new electric crematorium on the same site. Long-term planning may
consider alternative locations.
Air pollution, despite the closure of two major coal-fired
thermal generating plants, remains at unacceptable levels for both
the monuments and the people. Although private generation of power
with diesel, gasoline or kerosene generators is illegal within the
ci ty, the failure to bring on line any supplemental source of
energy has made Agra a city of lawbreakers. Without private
generators the city and its tourist trade would collapse virtually
overnight. To survive and prosper, i.ndustry requires assured power.
Tourism depends upon it. High level attention to development of a
coordinated long-term program is required.
Less polluting alternative fuels are simply not available and,
allegedly, will be too expensive to be economically competitive.
Lead free petrol is mandated by 1997, but many small internal
combustion engines in the city will, even then, operate on cheaper,
more polluting fuels. A small number of electric buses is a start
as is the proposal to create a walking mall one k~lometer around
~he Taj Mahal. Much more will be required. European cities have
successfully established the "Centrum" concept. The historic areas
of Agra City could be err~raced in such a Heritage Centrum.
Reduction of ur~an road congestion, emissions, noise l~vels
and damaging vibrations was s~nctioned in the 1972 Ag::a De-\T[;l0t=:tent
Plan to buiJ.u a bye-pa9s ring road at Dome distance from t!lC ·;ity
center. Funding has not been provided. Now, through the initiative
of the Commissioner, a start has been made on one critical s£ctlon
west of the city along a canal embClnkmr;nt. \~hile this i~ it \.'elcome
first step, it is under-funded as there is no provision for the
four railway overpasses required and not a substitute for major
program to implement an updated regional transportation plan.
Such a plan may include development of the growth axis from Agra
through MC3thura to New Delhi where very rapid industrial expansion
has already taken place. High speed light electric rail systems may
also be explored as an alternative to combustion driven transport.
Agra's rapid growth within the region has been a function of
_cs importance as a transportation center. National highways from
Calcutta in the east, Nagpur to the south and Bombay in the

southwest converge here before flowing north\vilrds along the Yamuna
to. Delhi and beyond. The principal alignment of the proposed Asian
Highway (A-I) is directly through Agra. This might well be rerouted to proceed northeast from Firozabad to the east of the
yamuna River and Wl;st of Aligarh, bye-passing Agra City and
entering Delhi by means of a new bridge south of Okla. Railways
from north, south, east and west also meet at Agra. To meet the
needs of the next century more than a ring road will be required.
Relocation of both road and rail lines t especially those which
bisect the old city should be carefully considered.

