-

7-2-

For the major part of its foreign tourist traffic, Agra
continues to be dependent upon airport and hotel facilities in New
Delhi. Despite excellent rail serv1ce,
the result is that
substantial revenue which might benefit Agra is captured by Delhi.
A case for a major n~w, non-military, international airport should
surely become part of a longer-term vision for Agra. Indeed, an
alternative airport of int~rnational standards in Agra could
enhance the safety of New Delhi as an international destination in
foggy and inclement weather.
A conunercial conference center is currently under construction
in Agra. There may be room for additional facilities, possibly
located in the trans-Yamuna area behind the Taj National Park,
where the needs for both conference and cultural groups could be
met. A concept akin to the successful India International Center,
possibly combined with an arts center similar to the Triveni Kala
Sangham might be a worthy long-term goal. Such facilities, needed
for Agra's growing populace, would also enhance it as a longer-term
tourist destination.
While the Panel recognizes the magnitude of the challenge
'faced by Agra~ it beLieves that it will be possible to meet that
challenge if the people of the city can be mobilized to take an
active role in the transformation which is essential. Once
Government of India, working in unity with the state and local
community, is clear its concerning goals, resources will follow.
The Pa!1el bel.le\-es that it would be timely for the 11.gra
Development Authoricy to re-visit all past. plans, includ.log the
Agra Development PI~~ of 1972 as revised, taking a twenty-five year
perspective through to the year 2020. A bold and imaginative vision
can only be achieved if it is stimulated by bold and imaginative
thinking now. The re-routing of major trunk roads and the gradual
closure of the railway line from Yamuna Station through the Agra
Fort station to Agra Cantonment would make possible the reestablishment of the unity which existed before 1857 between the
Agra Fort and the Jarna Masjid courtyard which was then destroyed.
The preservation of the railway right of way as a heritage walking
mall could enhance the visitor experience. The southern railway
bridge could then be converted to provide access for visitors to
'the Taj National Park and the proposed moonlight garden. The
integrity of Agra Fort would be enhanced if rtlternative locations
were found for current occupants. The possibility of establishing
a performing arts center within the Fort should then be considered.
The Panel believes that the economic advancement of the people
of Agra must be central to future development. Education and
training provide means to that end. Consideration should be given
to development of opportunities for enhancing the artisan,
restoration and the professional skills of Agra's citizens so that
they may fully participate in the flow of benefits which
development of Agr~ as a World Heritage City can provide.

