!he most excLt1ng

dev~lopmenc

during the Panel's fielc

t ios was a visit to che site of Shah Jahan's

~ehLab

BaRt

nlight garden) on the norm bank of the Yamuna. OPPOSilc
che Taj Mahal and within w'e projec~d confines of the Iaj
tU1C -

Park. The location anc dimensions of the Hehta~
confirmed by a partial clearing of the site by ~~e
Archaeological Survey of India in februar/ 1994.
Because
i t reveals that Shah Jahan had a much more exte.nsive pla.l
for the Taj Mahal complex than has been known previously,
the site is historicallY and architecUlrally important:. One
element cleared so far is a fuliated. octagonal pool
in diameCer on a riverfront terrace equal in width to the
Taj enclosure.
~acional

Bagh

~ere

The Panel believes this site is of the highest signific~
and that the AS! shculd be fully supported in its excavation
and d~cumentation which are necessary before there can be any
discussion of its preservation, restoration or developme~t.
The Panel believes the verificacion of the Mehtab Bagh site
will heighten incerest and help in the creation of in~e~Ational
Committees in support of the Agra Heritage Foundation.

Concl.usion
It is for the Taj Hahal primarily - and only later the other
historic buildings - that the majority of non-business visitors
come to Agra. Exploration, conservation and recoDstructioI! of tl~-=;:

newly excavated Mehtab Bagh as a

moonlig~t garden across the Y~mun~
from the Taj Mnhal would greatly i:1Cr:c:age this interest and provide
reason for more overnight visits and the generation of increased
income - important goal.s of the Agra Heritage Project. It Fould
also require appropriate regulations for future development of the

Taj National Park and the

trans-YaL~una

area.

Many additional and very important but rarely visited
buildings exist in the Agra region as well. If the physical upkeep
Jf these monuments could be assured and access to them enhanced,
~gra
would make better use of its extraordinary and unique
:esources while providing further reasons for longer visits.
By such means as the development of hotels for a ranae of
ncome levels and havelis in the older part of the city, clearly

walking routes, accurate information provided through
pecific guidebooks and other means, visitors to Agra can better
tilize the extraordinary opportunities that already exist within
he city. The development of artificial re-creations of the
istorical past. sho~ld be avoided or,. ~t a minimum, carefully
efined

Jntrolled, consl.derl.ng the wealth of or~glnal resources available.
Jere is no need to create a synLhetic experience when an aut~entic
Ie is at hand.
Agra's designation dS i.l ::orld Heritage Ci:.y Cdn
11y be justified if its unique heritage is preserved.

