9.

-7~-

The agreement between the Government of India and the United
states National Park Service which made possible the technical
studies and assessments undertaken since 1987 is now coming to an
end. The Panel suggests the Government of India create a timelimited Working Group, Panel or Task Force to develop detailed
proposals based upon previous studies by, say, December 31, 1995.
The time constraints imposed upon the Panel have made it impossible
to undertake the detailed assessment which the urgency of the

situation of Agra as a Heritage City warrants. Without thoughtful
and timely follow-up the work of the Panel will not count for much.
There is, however an opportunity to do constructive work and much
depends upon that follow-up.

The Panel members wish to express their appreciation to the
Ministry of Tourism and to the agencies and officers of the
Government of India, of the State of Uttar Pradesh and of the City
of Agra for their unfailing courtesy and t~ely support throughout
our deliberations. The Panel will await with great interest the
response of the Hinistry to its recommendations. We exprc!!s the
collective hope that our efforts may contribute to the well-being
of the people of Agra and to the preservation and conservation of
the city's monuments and the unique heritage of the region.

JO Il'-<"T BLU:

~ rBne:.:

r ~\f\"'EL

Co-Chairs

Hon. Abid Hussain, Vice-Chairman
Raj1v Gandhi Foundation

Indo-U.S.Sub-Commission on
Education and Culture

Members
Hon. Pupul Jayakar. Chairman
Ar~

Hon. Harry Barnes. Jr.
The Carter Center of

Indian National Trust

for

El1zabech B. Noynihan

and Cultural Heritage

Emory University

Dr. Kapilla Vatsyayan
Academic Director, Indira Gandhi
National Centre for ~~e ArLS

Dr. Milo C. Beach, Director

Dr. M.C. Joshi. Member Secretary
Indira Gandhi National Cencre

Dr. John C. Cool
Senior Associate

Arthur M. Sackler Gallery
The Smithsonian Insritutio

\v1.nrock In te rna tiona!

for the Arts

Counselors
Arr.ita Baig
Indian Naticnal Trust

[or Art and Cultural Heritage

Joseph Allen Stein
Architect

