-77-·

UMMARY

1.
Da"a so far available is not comprehensive; it lacks
civic and societal sources of pollution. It is suggested that
a comprehensive Bench Mark Survey be conducted that should
include not only Indu9try but also agrioulture as well as
urban and rural civic situation into accounk.
2.
As air pollutants in Agra have increased even after
the imposition of ban on industry and its expansion, and
inspite o-f the instalation of special devices to control
pollution." IMU'. there is no reason why the ban on the
functioning
of
industry and
on
its
expansion
and
diversification be continued.
3.
It is, however to be most heavyly emphasised that the
freedom to fUDction be qrantad to industry under .ost
stringent and strict pollution control norms. These norms
should be better than any country of the world and should
specificaly and explicitly take local ecological, climatic
and those ground realities into account that have not been
focus of attention in the west.
4.
Ministry of Tourism and ITDC, through flood lighting
and over illumination in and around Taj and other monuments
are creating a situation that not only destroys beauty ~f Taj
in moonlight but is most likely to cause insect damage to the
monuments. It is in total violation of all conservationist
norms of the ASI. ASI norm9 of conservation
should be
immediately restored and be made more stringent so that no
such situation is ever created anywhere under pressures from
variou9 lobbies persuing their own 90&1 of profit •• Thi. new
situation created under pressure from Ministry ot Tourism and
ITDC be discontinued forthwith.
5.
In order to control gaseous pollution in Agra,
development of a closed underground system and sewage
treatment is a must as it releases into the air molecules
that are measured as pollutants by various instruments.
Hence, it is imparative that a covered system of city sewage
collection and processing be developed immediately.
6.
Multiplicity of authority, absence of land use survey
and violation of Agra Master Plan are major hinderences for
greening the city. This situation be reversed. Taj Nagri Avas
Yojna next to Taj compound wall, planned in total violativn
of Agra Master Plan and unauthorised settlement opposite Taj
across the river be removed immediately.
7.
To check sand damage the area opposite taj be given
for vegetable CUltivation as was the practice earlier. This
whole area be developed as a large public orchard.
8.
Regular supply of electricity be guaranteed to Agra
to dessuade citizons from using other sources that pollute.
9.
Agra by-pass be immediately constructed.
10.
Ring railway in Agra be constructed. For this purpose
laid down and electrified track is already in place.
11.
Agra be supplied gas by pip.lina and a distr lbution
system for the same be developed immediately.
12.
Road transport for tourists be on the basis ot
electric transport, viz. trollybuses and electric vans.

3

