ECOLOGICAL SITUATION AND CONSERVATION OF MONUMENTS IN TTZ

Jaweed Ashraf
Professor,
School of Life Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi-l10067.
INTRODUCTION

Present problems of Taj Trapezium Zone (TTZ) in general
and of Agra in particular, are relatively speaking, recent.
This ecological decay is
primarily due to neglect of the
area round monuments at various plaoe., it not ot the whol.
region of TTZ, by all conccerned with prime place in this
context occupied by a combination of politicians of all
shades and colours and neo-rich real estate cum hotel
businessmen~ Administration, both of the city and of the UP
state, for a long time in the past, has been simply playing
second fidla to the tune set by the above combination. During
very recent times, while local administration is awakening to
the situation, it is a section of High ups in UP
administration and officials of the Ministry of Tourism who
are teaming up with real estate and hotel industry profiteers
to conv~rt TTZ into an area where concern of local people is
sllcrificed for hard currency tourism; even Indian tourists
are bru she d as ide in th is con text. N a tu r a 1 y , in t his
situation the Archaeological Survey Of India (ASI) is forced
into compromising with standards and norms through Tourism
ministry diktats and manipulations as well as through high
level fiats. Appointment of lAS officer as chief of ASl has
made the organisation completly non-professional
and
submissive to steps that are being forced by Ministry of
Tourism all around the Agra monuments that are harmful from
the point of view of conservation in the long run.
A number of commi ttees have qone into the i "Rue ..
involved; with the exception of Dr. Karan Singh caromi ttee,
none has so far recommended de-industrialisation of Agra. It
is this very demand
of de-industrialisation of TTZ and
especialy of Agra, that is the real bone of contention today.
While sources of polution in the TTZ are many and
varied, and we would not repeat the points that have been
covered by earlier committees between 1974 and 1993 as those
sources, identified so far, are valid and be taken care of.
However, we feel that three very important sources of
pollution have not been given their due attention so far.
Most significant of these that have been neglected so
far, is the sea change in the pattern of agricul tural crop
cultivation and agro-technoloqical practices in the TTZ
itself. other major polluting
sources not paid enough
attention are Light factor, especialy flood lighting that is
froced through by 'the Ministry of Tour ism, and open sewage
sources within the cities of Agra, Kathura, Firozabad and
Deeq (Bhara tpur). Both these sources, as we will see, are
important elements contributing to pollution in the whole
region. This includes SPM and gases released in the air.
4

