-7e;-

CONSEQUENCES OF AGRO-TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES IN THE REGION

wtile earlier, even as late as the 1960s, tilling of
the fields was overwhelmingly done by animal power, this has
now almost completely been replaced by tractors. This itself
has already led to a number of interesting irreversabla
socio-cultural
and ecological changes that till now have
been ignore'd by all. Major consequences of this shift from
animals to tractors in the region are:
Firstly, a shift from natural/partly planted
vegetation in the fields to larqe scale removal of all type
of s-ucb qreenary from
the
area
under
CUltivation.
Earlier these plants provided shade for chaining and resting
of animals and relaxation for working men during the day.
Tractors do not need any such vegetation. Moreover, thanks to
admirable BOO efforts, the peasents today realise that shade
hinders crop growth. Greenary, other than crops sown has no
use in the fields under the new ethico-cultural dispensation
focussing on maximisation of cash prof i ts, Removal of
veqetation and cuttinq 40WD of tre.. i . pri.arily due to tnt.
conciousness and implied profits through timber sale.
Secondly, the new attitude is already resuling in ~ga
scale utilisation of chemical fertilizers in the fields to
maximise yeild even if it has not reached the record levels
of some other parts of the country_ This also means, as shown
by European experience, that the soil fed on high dos-es of
chemical fertilizers begins to demand more of it with passage
of time.
In other words, the damage has a dimention that
accelerates with time. Hence the input of various chemicals
and water has been on the rise and shall continue to show
this tendency in future. It is obvious that the decomposition
products of these chemicals will ultimately go into the air.
It may be noted that in terms of chemical parameters
these decomposition
products
from
agriculture
have
predominantly the same components that so far have been
measured and attributed to non-agricultural sources. The
point has convincingly been brought out by the UP Government
committee Report of 1994, presided over by the Commissioner
Agra Division. It is shown in this Report (p.l0) that inspite
of closure of two thermal power units and diesalisation ot
railway yard, SO levels have qone up in Agra. No report so
far has explaine~ this anomoly. In other words, thRre may be
sources of pollution other than those yet identifie~d.
It should also be realised that agro-technological
changes not only manifest themselves in consumption of fuel
but also in maintainance and repair infrastructure that in
its turn may be adding to certain types of polluting elements
all around.
As no specific study bas been done to iden tify this
aspect of various chemicals in the air of TTZ, it is
imparative to do so even now. It should be realised that
agriculture being spread over wide area all around the cities
of the TTZ, no conclusion can be drawn for these ci ties on
the basis of partial studies and
a priori assumptions that
are beavyly loaded against industry and soaked in politics of
5

