shifting Mathur. Refinary to region. politioaly more
advanyageous for some.
Thi~d serious consequence of this shift from cattle to
tractors in agricultural practices can be
seen in changing
cropinq pattern wherein under the new trend the middle crop
between those of Rabi and Kharif, called Zaid or extra, sown
around first rains and harvested latest by the end of the
rainy season, ,has almost disappeared. This crop suppl ied
green fodder or Chari for the cattle. In other words, the
fields DOW remain predominantly fallo-w fo-r sUbstantial
duration of time i.e. from March-April till the begining of
the next sowing. This lying fallow without green cover
resul ts in the growth of weeds. Decomposi tion of these
chemical inputs through out the year releases their
products in the air. Unknown, unestimated but obviously
substantial volume of d~composition products of fertilizers,
pesticides, herbicides etc. are all the time being added to
the air through out the year. Their role in polution of air
and water 8S well as in increase in the SPM due to fallow
land for about 4 months, has not been estimated for the TTZ.
without any green cover around, the fallow lands during
summer add to SPM in the air. Obviously, the amount of such
suspension would be directly proportional to removal of
greenary in the fields which in turn shall be a func~tion of
tractorisation i~ the given area in the TTZ. It will be more
in developed Agra-Mathura-Firuzabad sector and less in
Bharatpur. Even within the developed sector it will vary from
place to place depending upon factors other than industry and
MR. Attribution of every thing to industry in such
circumstances is not justified. It is also not justified to
blame Mathura Refinary (l-lR) for all polution while other
reasonabley plausable sources for similar molecul~s are
readyly available everywhere in the TTZ~~
Our understanding of prevailing ground reality in the
TTZ can explain otherwise unexplainable observation that in
the Agra region Shamsabad has a maximum of SPM of 739 with an
avarage of 385 as compared to Agra Ind.-II of 632 and 519
respectively. It is the same story in case of Mathura where
Baldev has a maximum of 643 SPM and an avarage of 493 as
compared with Mathurn Ind. of 429 and 199 respectively. It is
repeat performance in case of Rupwas with 1039 and 625
compared
with
Bharatpur
Ind.
of
337
and
225
respectively. (Table 3.9, p.III-24 of NEERI :Report of 1993
titled Air Pollution Studies To Redefine Taj Trapezium
Coordinates). NEERI report simply gidesteps the explalnatlon
issue on all such counts.
On the basis of the above we may conclude that increase
in SPH in the TTZ is, in fact, predominantly not a funcction
of various industries. It obviously is the resul t of
drasticaly changed aqro-technological practices in the TT2 as
a whole; a fact that has not only not been taken into account
in various doccuments concerning TTZ but has not been studied
at all. If it is true for SPM, it ccould also be the same
for the unstudied factcrs like decomposition products of
various origins like chemical fertilizers etc. in the fields •

•:i<' P/.u"
;n/~~

4« , _

f)t.,lL,; UT

oj J;-, ~., ... , 2it . 4. <JS" I' -"3 {4Y j>e,;tc G"uk
f~;h.

ie-,....) .......

