.- 91-

This is an illustration to underline the correctness of
the argument forwarded by us. It is not a detailed analysis
of any of the reports so far submitted.
GASEOUS POLUTION IN AGRA AND ROLE aF INDUSTRY

g....

As pointed out above, not only BPK »ut
in tbe
atmospber could also be a consequence ot changed agricultural
practices. This contention seems to explain abnormal rise in
S02 in such places as Govardhan, Baldev and Freh in Mathura
sector (NEERI,p-III-40) where industry is conspicuous by its
absence on any sUbstantial scale.
It is the same with CO, He, NO x and 502 as given for
such places in Agra region as Khairagarh, Achhnera, and
Fatehpur Sikri; for 5° 2 , NO , and He in Rupwas and Bayana i
for SPM in Vrindavan, Mat ana Nandgaon in Mathura; for 502 in
Vrindavan, Raya and Sadabad; NO x in Mat, Nandgaon and
Vrindavan; He in Mat, Vrindavan and Sadabad; CO in Vrindavan,
Mat, 5adabad, Govardhan and Raya (ibid.-table 4.12,p.-37).
This again is an illustration and not detailed
analyusis of the data presented by NEERI.
Our understanding is supported by
Table 4.2 (ibid.
p.IV-S) indicating that there has been only 5% increase in
Ferrous casting; reduction of about 48% in Ferro alloys;
marginal increase in chemical and engineering industrieesj no
change in refractory bricks; marginal inccrease in lime
processing; 85% rise in rubber processing in Agra between
1981 and 1993. In other words the data presented in NEERI
report exposes the fact that the measured parameter. are
being substantialy int luenced by sources other than tho ••
pointed out and so far studied. However, the report does not
dwelfon this point.
From the data available, it is obvious that role of
industry per se in pollution of the TTZ ci ties has been
rather limited.
In absence of any hard evidence, and in the light of
the possibilities inherent in the presently fast developing
agricUltural situation, identification of MR as the source at
best is a surmise and belongs to the category of an a priori
conclusion not based on data and hard facts.
As has been pointed out elsewhere (annex.A), foundaries
at Agra, including those casting heavy arti lary under the
Mughals, are as old as establishment of the Mughal empire
itself, i.e. to the first quarter of 16th century. These are
mentioned by Babur in his Tuzak.
Some of the processes
employed in handling various metals during the reign of Akbar
are described in Ain-i-Akbari of Abul Fazl. Other facts of
casting canons and maneufecture of iron, copper, brass, and
other products are also mentioned in historical records. It
is the same story with various aspects of textile and silk
maneufecturing, indigo production,
tanning of leather etc.
that predominantly used water from wells and the r 1ver and
discharged their waste in the river or in the soil itself as
there was no other way out. What may have happened during the
recent past is a shift from natural to synthetic chemicals
7

