- t$'-<.-

tha t are- not bio-degradable. Simi lar ly, brick making and
other such technological practices are also as old as the
city itsrlf as these catered for people residing in the city
in the same manner as today. We have no observation from any
quarter, Indian or European, that these aspects of medieval
or early modern Agra urbanisation, or that of any other urban
centre in TTZ, spoiled nature during the past since 16th to
19th century or posed any uncomfort for urban population.
Pollution of Agra is not mentioned as an important fact
even under the British who had their contonment by the city
itself. How come the problem has assumed such ser ious
dimentions predominantly within last three decades? Reason
for pollution doees not lie with either primitive technology
or various sectors of present day industry. It obviou81y i.
due to socio-cultural and aqro-technoloqical changes that
have taken place recently and bas emerged in its present
serious dimentions only after attainment of independence and
implementation of certain laws like Consolidation of
landholdings, and commercialisation of agriculture with
complete tax holiday till date. It has its roots also in
politicisation of every aspect of life and profit orientation
of all aspects o-t society as reflected in total neglect of
civic facilities in the city of Agra during last four
decades.
SEWAGE PROCESSING IN THE CITIES OF TTZ

Agra was described as rivaling medieval Damascus and
Baghdad in the orient and London or Paris in the Occident.
Obviously it was a neat and clean city wi thout any foul
smells emiting from sewage inspite of the fact that we have
so far got no evidence of any underground sewage collection
and disposition system. However, today it is a very different
story. While it would be irrelevant here to point to a number
of other facits of this problem in both Agra and Mathura, it
is pertinent to note that decomposing sewage in it. wet form
produces gases with molecules very closely similar to those
of bio-gas. This is the conclusion one can draw from the
recent explosions in Delhi sewage system. This point is
extremely relevant for our discussion because the TTZ
monitoring parameters identify substances that are common to
both bio-gas and certain emiossions from MR and a section of
industry located in the TTZ. In absence of any survey for
this concrete identification we have no way to
aport ion
blame for such emissions either to HR or industry located in
TTZ. Consequently, our conclusions till date are at best
conjuctures and subjective assumptions that are not based on
hard facts. Anyone having any experience of such localities
in Agra as New Shahganj, t-1adia Katra, Raja Ki Mandi, Loha
Mandi and a number of other old residential localities, and
in Mathura of such localities as Bharatpur Darvaza, Deeg
Darwaza, Holi Darwaza, ISBT, etc. or of Bus terminus, CFC
Community Centre and all the highly romanticised narrow lanes
of the holy Vrindavan, would vouch for the stink that comes
out of the open gutters and flowing sewage during most part
8

