- gg-

of the year. What we smell are the same air born molecules
that are recorded by automatic monitors and largly attributed
to MR as there is no industry worth the name in these parts
of Mathura or Vrindavan. Present situation is the cumulative
consequence of neglect of sanitation by those in power in the
Agra and Matl)ura District and city
civic structures over
last about 3 to 4 decades. Inspite of all the talk about dry
waste that is dumped at various places, this aspect of wet
vaste or sewaqe has not been properly studied and analysed.
Without this study it is fll-tile to argue about concrete
sources that pollute the air in TTZ. Bharatpur is not
different from the above two cities.

SHOULD INDUSTRY BE PERMITTED IN THE TTZ?
A ban on expansion o~ industries usinq fossil fuel in
Agra vas clamped by the <jovernment in ±981. It is ~
continuing. These industries are not allowed to expand.
During this time, while this industrial activity was put in
limbo, two thermal power plants werte completely closed and
the whole railway yard was diesalised.
Theae step.
drastically reduced the amount of S02 in the ambient air of
Agra. The contribution of hard coke and steam coal, according
to Ole data, came down from 23 microgram/NH3 in 1981 to 5.6
microgram/NH3 even in 1982. However, it is amizing that from
1982 till date there has been a continuous rise in s02 in the
ambient air over Taj. This S02 reached its peak in 1991. From
official data it is clear that there has been a decrese of
about 25% in the consumption of coal/ coke by the industries.
However, during this very period 602 content of the a~~ient
air went up by 4-6 times.
It is obvious from the government data itsself that
industry in Agra has not been primarily responsible for 502
pollution in the ambient air over Taj at least after 1981. If
anything, contribution of industry has been marginal while
non-industrial sources obviously are the major contributors ~d~
in the inventory of pollutants of the air.
V
There is ground to suspect that NEERI
report
calculations for S02 emission by industrial units consuming
fossil fuel are grossly exagerated, subjective, argumantative
and based on lopsided and biased assumptions.
As underlined through citations above, there is no
solid ground or reason based on facta that industry in the
TTZ is a major contributor to various elements of pollution Q~
for which different parameters have been measured. There also
~
seems to be no ground backed by hard facts for continuinq the
total ban on industrial development in the TTZ.Besides, as
most of the presently functioning industrial units have
instaled the recommended instruments for pollution control as
per the directive of the Supreme Court of India and
specifications of the Central I UP Pollution Control Boards,
and, as these units have been complying with the strtndards of
emission as laid down by var ious bodies, the reason for any
restriction under present circumstances, seems to have been
eliminated. Hence there is no reason de etre for the imposed
9

