-~4

-

ban to continue any further. However, it should not only be
made explicit but emphasised that
this functioning ot the
industrial
units
and
their
further
expansion
or
diversification should be under strict monitoring and within

stringent pollution control limits suitably imposed through
proper legislation and control.
It

should not be lost sight of that industrial
in the whole TTZ, and especialy in Agra, has been
a historical process that has been such an integrated element
in the demographic and cultural fabric of the urban centres
that its cesarian removal would create a serious crisis in
the whole society with potential of ugly and violent
manifestations that may destroy and nullify all the
advantages that this attitude of de-industralisation implies.
It should be noted that no committee should be seen as
a direct or indirect helper to various industrial groups
widespread over India. If such units are permi tted in Goa
inspite of Rashol rare collection of 15th-16th century
monuments and original paintings that are being conserved
with the nelp of UNESCO again as part of the Heritage
programme, or in Delhi with a number of Heritage monuments,
and with Poona belt bleeching polluting smoke all around with
complete immunity, undue restrictions on Agra would certainly
amount to indirectly helping some industrialists at the cost
of the others. Hence, while there should be most stringent
measures of pollution control, the industry in Agra must, at
the same time t helped in various ways to cope up wi th the /... ~
costs involved and not only to survive but to expand without
endangering the monuments. The restrictions on functioning
and the ban on expansion is prima taci not required.
While maneufecturing industry is one aspect of this
type of activity, the other facit of industry can be seen in
cottage or small scale industry that is as old in Agra as the
city itself. This sector had sustained life in Agra in the
centuries past and is doing the same today.
The Basti of Tajganj,
locatjed
opposi te
Taj and
connected with it through maintanence and repair work since
Taj was built, as mentioned earlier, was of those artisans
who built the Taj and were repairing it when the need arose.
Today many of their d~endents living there have related
professions like marble inlay, stoneware, wood and other
production, carpet making as well as some catering for food
of the tourists and other residents of the area. It is only
in carpet making that wool dying uses coal as energy source
which causes some pollution. However, this pollution is
nothing in comparison with diesal of transport of various
types that plays without restrictions. If these artisans are
provided with reliable gas or electricity, present problem
of pollution from their side shall disappear in no time.
The only way to get rid of pollution in Agrll, as
pointed out in the Report of the committee presided over by
the Commissioner of Agra (p.20-23) requires some steps that
are highly desirable. However, it may be noted, that the
government of UP is so non-serious about these measures that
they have not taken any steps, even formal and routine ones,
d~velopment

10

