80

far to even simply begin the process in this direction. UP

government should be forced to initiate steps in the
direction o-f implementation of the recommendations that are
in its range and start the process of consulting central
government in this direction where the items require central
intervention. There can be no other conclusion from the facts
available on record that the governments at Lucknow and New
Delhi are paying only lip
service
to
the
various
recommendations and only Ministry of Tourism is active in
taking harmful steps. This attitude has to be reversed.
The governments, as a matter of their official policy
as seen in practice, a~a pushing de-industrialisation ot TTl
without any basis for this- step and in violation of all
reports, policy resolutions and public posture, again on

record iD respective Legislative Assembly and Parliament.
FLOOD LIGHTING, LIGHT POLLUTION AND MINISTRY OF TOURISM
We have discussed this problem in detail elsewhere
(Annex.B). The story of Konarak is likely to be repeated in
Agra if the insistance of Ministry of Tourism is permitted to
be implemented and Taj and other monuments in TTZ are
alloweed to be flood lit through out the year.
It is a tragedy that Ministry of Tourism, with lots of
Indian money and hard curreency at their disposal, is trying
to introduce into India ideas and practices of Europe and USA
but without any consideration for concre~te climatic
conditions of the given region. This climatic difference has
to be taken into serious consideration in the over all
picture of controling potential damage to monuments.
FLOOD LIGHTING, LIGHT POLLUTION AND NIGHT VIEW OF TAJ
An off-shoot of light pollution or over illumination 1n
and around the monument as well as on roads leading to Taj is
the observation and general SUbjective feeling of Agra
residents and visi tors that night view of the Taj has
qualitatively gone down. Taj in moonlight does not appear to
be as ebterial and shining as it used to be. Even if it ~eeds
proving by exper imental data, it is Wurth cons ider ing the
point that this public opinion may be a consequence of
overall increease in the amount of light in the night
atmospher round the monuments themselves due to reflection of
large quantity of light that in its turn is substantialy and
posetively affected by the increased SPM in the air in and
around Agra in particular and TTZ in general.
It is simply amizing that everyone so far has ignored
the fact of significant increase in the amount of road and
other lights in and around Taj while evaluating the
impression of deter ioration in visual
quall ty
of the
monument. Because of this increased light, coupled with the
background reflected light of near by sources, the quality of
vision under moon light would naturaly get seriously affected
in the same manner as moon itself, when seen today in major
cities the world over, appears more like an intruder than

11

