·-~6·-

part of that nature in which these cities exist. It may be
pointed out that astronomical observatories like the one at
Nainital are being seriously hampered
by
reflected
atmospheric light. It is obvious that SPM too in this context
would have an important role to play. These facts are known
to all except, apparently, to the high ups in the Ministry of
Tourism!
Light pollution in Aqra is a-n aspect which bas not
attracted that serious attention which it deserves from the
-point of view of viewing Taj during full moon nights round
the year. ~his aspect of pollution should be recognised and
paid attention to. There is no other way of looking at public
discontent as, on this count, the ordinary people would not
analyse but go by their own comparison of the past and
present or what is popularly called the sixth sense.
In ~ther words, it is ideas of the Ministry of Tourism
and ITDC that today emerge as not only serious violations of
conservational norms but also serious potential danger to the
normal prolongation of the existance of the monuments
themselves with the ASI lying prostrate and acting as a
serious colaborator and accompalice enhancing the dangers to
the monuments that are under AS! custody.
ENHANCED DAMAGE POTENTIAL DUE TO MINISTRY OF TOURISM

We have pointed to the damage flood lighting is likely
to cause to Taj under climatic condi tions of Agra. This
aprehension is based on experience of Konarak. In this
conte;xt
one would like to point out the steps already
implemented round Taj under pressure from Ministry of Tourism
and the consequences implied in such steps.
One can only surmise on the basis of tradition as to
what the passage to Taj up to the main gate was during the
Mughals. One knows from records that during the British it
was Kachcha road with Bajri cover that was sprinkled with
water from time to time to keep it cool during the summers
and to keep dust from rising during other seasons. Today,
thanks to the efforts of the Ministry of Tourism, the road
bas been covered with red sandstone. One may note that even
under the Mughals the space opposite Taj was occupied by
artisans and traders. These craftsmen were settled there 8&
the site was a traditional Manzil and their profession was a
component of all such establishments (Annex.A). Moreover, as
the contemporary accounts show, these were the craftsmen who
had built the Taj and their services were required for its
maintainance and upkeep. This settlement then, as now, was no
sourcee of danger to Taj
as their technology and trade
practices posed no threats to Taj complex. This aspect of
danger to Taj from practices and way of working of these
people today needs investigation to assertain technological
inventory and its effect on surroundings as of date.
Under the British the road remained Kachcha. Was it
because of the fiscal and monitary constraints of the Crown?
It seems the reason for continuation of this norm was
conservationist as it was easy to keep such road cool by
12

