-~7-

sprinkling water through a Mashak that was normal for thoBe
times. Today this can be done by machenical means. Kachcha
road approach was meant to avoid micro- level heat generation
through aDsorption and its re-emission by stone. It was meant
to keep the surroundings of the monument cool. What Ministry
ot Tourism bas done is to reverse tbe trend even in violation
of NEERI Reoport understanding on this point.
Under pressure from the Ministry of Tourism the entire
road aproaching Taj has been paved with red sandstone.
Normaly, motor1sed vehecles are not allowed on tb.is stretch
though, when protocol requires, this can be don~. The point
is not that. Red sanstone paved passage absorbs heat all the
time during the light hours and emits it back during night.
In other words, this change under pressure from the Ministry
ot Tourism bas increased the ambient temperature in the
immediate vicinity of the Taj inspite of the fact that all
the reports submitted so far underline that such increase in
temperature is harmful for the monument conservation. No body
but the Ministry of Tourism is responsible for this decision.
It is simply amaiz ing that highly vocal press,
otherwise pointing to all real or even imaginary dangers to
the monument, including Taj being shifted to NOIDA, and
analysing all the reports so far submitted, has remained
totally silent about all the doings of the I-tinistry or
Tourism! One is simply wonderstruck by this fact.
VISUAL OBSERVATION OF TAJ AND OTHER MONUMENTS TODAY

Much is talked about yellowing of Taj and other
decadance in the visual aspects of the monument. Besides many
others I there are two problems invol ved. Technical aspects
can be assertained from experts of the ASI.
Firstly, these days it is a norm with the ASI that they
do not want to have the building look like original after
renovation and repair. They want it to look old! This point
can easyly be evaluated after looking at Iris panneis at the
enterance to the cenotaph sector. On one one side there is a
restored piece and there is another that is repaired. Whi Ie
the restored one is impossible to seperate from the original,
in the repaired one the distinction is recognisable. This
comparison shows the capabilities of the team of restorers
and specialists in the ASI. The visible distinction on the
other hand is a matter of policy decision on part of the ASI.
It is also the trend and the in-thing in professional circles
the world over. The same can be seen in Qutab Minar at Delhi,
Sun Temple and other monuments at Konarak, Aitamad-ud-Daula
and Sikandara at Agra and a host of other monuments both
ancient and medieval; both Hindu and Muslim. Hencce it would
be a foly to consider the old-look of the monument as a
manifestation of neglect on part of the ASl.
In so far as the Taj is concerned it is a fact that
there is no sign of decay or neglect of the monument as a
whole and~ i ts stones in particular. Only the sand s tone part
of the balcony on the river side is sand-damaged, in all
probablity only recently. There are some minor aspects that
13

t.;t

