need periodic attention and repairs and that has been
provided to them for last more than a hundred years.
Otherwi~e the monument would not have survived so far.
Repairs were required since the times of Shahjahan when first
repairs w~re necessitated as a consequence of quality of
stone and some other construction defects.
Nothing
extraordinary has happened ~ince last three decade~ in so far
as .aintai~ance aud repair of the Taj i. concern.d. Taj haa
certainly not been neglected by the ASI 80 far. Now it is
being seriously compromised under pressure froll. Ministry O-t
Tourism and local politician-land-hotel lobby.
In this context it may be recalled that the marble slabs
used for surface dressing are quite thick almost everywhere.
These are not going to be influenced substantialy by the
surface environmental changes. Hence,
primarily,
the
underlying bricks and mortar is safe and sound though its
life span may not be exactly the same as mentioned in the
NEERZ report because they seem to be assuming the building in
its totality to be made of the marble slabs and that too ot
ordinary thic-kness that is nowadays used in building
construction. This assumption is in toto based on ignorance
of the fact that under the marble there is brick and mortar
that constitutes the realy damageable part of the monument if
water leaks to these depth~ It is this danger of increase in
capilary action o~ cracks in mortar developing due to large
fluctuations in ambient temperature of the surroundings that
is further enhanced by the recent steps of the Ministry of
tourism due to large a:;:sa stone surfacing of the pa thways
outside Taj and by flood lighting the whole monument as this
may lead to insect damage to mortar at the joints, leadinq to
passage for water to enter and spoil the underlying bricks.
It is the red sandstone surfacing in the Taj complex,
and the surface mortar layers on the boundary wall, that are
vulnarable to climatic as well as biotic damage and
degradation. However, significance of this aspect is marginal
in comparison with the main building and its ilT'portant
structural components.
Hence, one can conclude that climatic and other
damage to Taj compex as a whole in fact has been only
superficial and marginal, not deserving so much noise.
In places like sikandara and Ai tmad-ud-Daula there is
serious problem with fungus and leachen colonies on red
sandstone slabs. Other damage is due to human factors; It is
not climatic or due to pollution.
Taj, as well as other Heritage monuments, have retained
their archi tectural and visual impact since at least the
times these were taken over by the Bri tish, i. e. since the
establishment of the ASI.
We should remember that a 11 these monuments before
their take over by the AS!, especialy during the last phase
of the Mughal empire, were very seriously and repeatedly
vandalised, looted and burnt. Hence, their takeover by the
ASI ab init~o was in a damaged, depleted and neglected state.
It is worth recalling that rI'aj in fact had been sold to
American businessman from California. It was only at the
14

