shipment permission stage that Lord Curzon, the then Viceroy,
came to know of it. It was he, not any Indian of any
religion, ~ast, region or conviction, who saved the Taj for
India and took real care for its conservation. This is why
the schandalier presented by him to Taj today occupies pride
of place in the canotaph of Shahjahan and is mentioned to
all by the attendents. So much for Heritage conciouness!
The demands for saving of Taj on the one hand and
demolition of monument in AyQdhya without any protest from
heritage lovers on the other are the epitaphs of our heritage
conciousness. If any thing, recent demolition in Pune of the
historic late medieval Chabutra of Ghasiram Kotwal, about 300
years old, and not a single whimper on this count by any body
of any politics or cultural pride, once again underlines that
tall talks about monument conservation simply do not fit with
the ethos of people seeped in the tradi tions of practicing
and believing in the concepts of Kama, Artha and Koksha. This
in fact is what we as a people are. This point is also
underlined by the fact that the people of Agra, so much
agitateu about Taj and pollution, have done precious little
to overcome filth, an important source of air pollution, for
last four decades inspite of elections and change of parties
holding majority in civic bodies of the city and in the
government at Lucknow.
ASI AND BLATANT VIOLATIONS OF ALL CONSERVATION NORMS

In this contex the sublimely subservient and dosile
posture of the ASI at various levels of their organisation
needs special attention. It is worst at the top.
No~where in the world, i.e. in the west from where we
took the ruditnents of the concept of monument conserva tiOD
and paying attention to heritage, and grafted it on our own
cultural ethos where such concepts have been tradi tionaly
conspecuous by their entire and absolute absence, the norms
of monument conservation and their up keep are compromised
under any circumstances. Nowhere like in London, Rome, Paris,
Madr id, Lisbon, Amsterdam, Berl in or even Moscow, st.
Petersberg and other old cities of financialy starved CIS
countries, these norms and practices have ever been changed
for attracting tourists. Their visiting hours, ticket costs,
residential limit laws, norms for commercial activity etc.
that emerged historicaly have not been modified either for
VVIPs or foreign tourists in general or to help in making
money by the commercial interests. This is not the case at
Agra where such norms are thrown to winds as a matter of
norm and where harassment to tourists by touts is common.
In relation to the question of Agra the AS! simply lies
prostrate before the Misistry of Tourism and ITDC and permits
them to do with its legitemate custody all that they desire.
They do not even whimper in the manner of a mongrel that is
badly treated. As a matter of daily observation ASI abets
violations by vested interests from the city; [rom UP; or
from Centre. Their attitude is this respect is most glaringly
seen in the case of demolition of Babri Masjid, a protected
15

