monument belonging to 16th ceentury.
In the hue and cry about the structure being mosque or
mandir, i:.. was never underlined that it was a protected
monument. After its demolition,
the ASI did not even
symbolicaly registered any case under relevant Act (9) and
legislations against any body. They simply did not register
their ca~e! It is the same story with flood-lighting of
various monuments at Delhi, Agra, Konarak, Goa, etc. where
serious breaches of conservationist norms are lumped up as a
matter of routine.
CLIMATIC SITUATION IN TTZ : ARID I SEMI-ARID OR SUBTROPICAL?
It is not justified to attribute increased SPM to arid
climate, as NEERI report does, and, on this basis, tries to
explain the high SPM observed through out the TTZ. It is just
not a fact for Agra-Mathura region situated on river banks of
Jamuna and even otherwise part of the rich Doaba part of the
Ganga-Jamuna river systems.
It lIlay be noted that since the inception of the ci ty
there have be-en repeated reports of high tempera tures at
Agra; never of aridity. Pathan historical records, personal
or official account from Babur to Auranzeb and even later;
reports of a number of European travellers and contemporary
Indo-Persian accounts etc. are all available on this count.
Historical records do not support this contention of NEERI
report. It is just not based on historical facts.
Pleasent evenings and hot days during summers wi th
frost damage to tree-s and day-time low temperatures during
winters have been, and yet are, characterstic of both TTZ and
near by areas including Delhi and its surrounding regions in
Haryana, Rajasthan and Punjab. While the situation in cities
has changed due to high density of buildings and asphalted
roads, both emitting absorbed heat to influence micro-level
si tuations, such
change so far has never been taken as a
basis for designating Delhi and other regions in the said
states in arid / semi-arid zone. This confusion regarding
climatic conditions of TTZ seems to be based on serious
misconception concerning the content of the terms 'semi-arid'
and 'sub-tropical'. Even this dryness of the TTZ is not at
all late medieval or early modern i. e. from the Bri tish
times. This is a pretty recent phenomenon and the reason for
this change seems to be a drastic reduction of vegetation
cover and over drawing of sub-soil water in the whole TTZ.
This reduction in plant cover is primarily due to cutting
down of orchards in the TTZ, selling the wood and then
selling the land to builders and developers to convert
agricultural land into urban settlements at a profit for self
but at the cost of nature and now of heritage. In other
words, this change in the microclimate of the TTZ is due to
drasticcally changed land use pattern in the TTZ. It is
primarily due to removal of vegetation cover from the land
and, especially in case of Agra, due to destruction of the
Agra Canal as a result of water fued between UP nnd Haryana
government as this canal used to irrigate large areas of Agra.
16

