GARDENS AND ORCHARDS ROUND AGRA DURING MUGHAL TIMES
We --:-ay point out that the urban centres vi z. Agra,
Mathura, Bharatpur and Firuzabad, earlier had large number of
orchards all around their respective settlements on the
pattern that was common to all cities, viz.Delhi under Firuz
Tughlaq had 16000 orchards all round the city parameters.
such orchards were age old tradition in India since ancient
times as recorded by Chanakya (Annex. C) and continued in this
spirit till the end of the Mughal empire. Extent of such
orchards may be immagined from the fact that it was in such
an orchard, now housing the Lucknow Botanical Garden, that
the entire British army encamped during the seige of Lucknow
in 1857. It is the same story for Delhi when British army
attacked the city from Kashmiri Gate side. Their stay was
also in a garden on the outside of Delhi. As a matter of fact
cutting down of orchards was most harsh long term puniShment
to the opponent and many an orchard was destroyed during the
various wars including those of 1857 because of this reason.
Once such orchards all round the urban centres in TTZ
were gone, espacialy during recent times for cash money to be
invested in other areas, it is obvious that micro-climatic
situation shall change for the worse, increasing the SPli,
temperature and dryness of the soil all around.
It is quite possible that this insistance on change in
classification of Agra and Mathura in particular, and of TTZ
in general, as semi-arid is also being done with an eye on
additional subsidies as per certain governmental norms.
Interested elements of these cities have been mentioning this
point to various committees and forums to create public
opinion on this count even when records till 1950s and 1960s
do not support this assertion. This is being done with profit
motive as the exclusive driving force behind such demands.
Interestingly, those demanding change in Agra region
classification do not cite either contemporary facts or
historical records as evidence. They want various forums and
committees to do their job by accepting this surmise and
recommending such change. NEERI report supporting this
contention is again not based on facts.
While we have scanty records of Agra before the arrival
of the Mughals, abundant Mughal records since early 16th
century
affirm establishment of large number of gardens/
orchards all round Agra by various kings, their courtiers and
nobles as well as by Jagirdars belonging
to different
religions. Besides these gardens I orchards, each Manzil, or
resting place for caravans and individuals that was located
at every 12 kos distance on all roads of the land (Annex.A)
had large amount of vegetation in and around itself. It was
such a Manzi1 owned by Sawai Raja Man Singh that was bought
by Shahjahan and paid for by four other such Manzils. Taj of
today is located on this land. Obviously the land, and its
suroundings were orchards full of fruit bearing and medicinal
trees, some of Which, persurnably, remained standing even
after the monument was constructed. Not cutting mature trees
was a tradition at least since the time of Firuz Tughlaq as
17

