recorded by contemporary documtfentation. This point is
brought out by the layout plan of the walled area of the
monument now located in the site museum of Taj itself.
Interestingly, conceptualy the plan of the garden at Taj is
fully in agreement with the conclusions drawn by Chanakya
(Annex.C). It may be noted that during 1957 the British used
much o~ the 'Wo,od from this garden and that surrounding Taj
that they burnt in the compound itself, causing extensive
damage to the monument, persumably, as punishment to rebels.
As pointed out by a number of scholars (Annex.A) trees
selected for planting in and around Taj 'Were such that these,
in one way or the other, absorbed the harmful effects of
various pollutants that are present now and, persumbaly, wa~e
present even during the period of Taj construction as Agra
was not only capital city but also an industrial and
technological centre of the empire producing gases during
maneufecturing that are an integral part of the metalurgical
processes themselves per see
It is this role of plants that was, it seems, well
understood during the medieval times and is being slowly relearnt today even if with fits and starts.
These trees played a role in conservation of monuments
through their micro-level inflUence. It is this fact that we
today have to re-learn and understand.
VEGETATION

IN

TTZ

AND

ROD-ND

TAJ

AS

ELEEMENT

FOR

THE

PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF THE MONUMENTS

Sojan Rai Bhandari, a chroniclor of late 17th- early
18th century, mentions Agra as a ci ty where" Jamuna river
traverses the city for 4 kroh. There are on both sides high
buildings and attractive gardens ... "
(1918,
Ed.Zafar
Hasan,Khulasat-at-Tawarikh,Delhi, p.39). This observation can
be taken back from 18th century to early 16th century on the
basis of available records especially accounts of the times
of Babur, Akbar and Jahangir.
It is well known that Babur built his famous Char Bagh
at a site right opposite to where Taj stands today and in his
memoires mentioned that the side of Jamuna opposite to the
Fort was so densely covered with trees that one can see only
green that looked like a jungle. Garapes and other fruits,
brought from Afghanistan, Iran and Central Asia, were
cultivated in this garden. Obviously it was not a small
affair though Babur does not mention the area of orchards
planted on the other side of the Jamuna during his times.
These continued during the reign of Akbar and were further
expanded at other places during the reign of Jahangir.
Besides the gardens built by Babur, there were large
Havelis of the nobles inside as we 11 as outs ide the ci ty
through out the period Agra remained as a capital, i.e. till
the times of Shahjahan. These Havelis had their own large
gardens densely planted with fruit trees and medicinal herbs.
European traders during the reign of Jahangir to Aurangzeb
described Agra as a garden city and the road from Agra to
Lahore, passing through Fatehpur Sikri, Deeg and Bharatpur,
18

