--'7.5-

as a "garden walk"
due to dense plantation of trees all
round. Accounts of Thevenot and Carreri are examples in mind.
Tiger hunts of Jahangir and Akbar round Agra, Mathura
and upto Delhi (area know known as Salimgadh near Red Fort)
are well recorded. Elephant hunts in the forest of Bayana,
near Agra in the TTZ, are recorded in detail by Abul Fazl in
Ain-i Akbari itself. We have discussed details elsewhere
(Annex.D). Fatehpur Sikri lake, lake near Bharatpur, Jamuna
full of water except for the lean summer season etc. are some
of the facts of the past that played important role in
keeping the whole region green and pleasent. Large forest
cover that substantialy lasted till early 19th century, and
vegetation that was yet SUbstantial even during the first
half of the present century, was responsible for arnaleoration
of high temperatures in the whole region now covered by TTZ.
It may be of interest to mention that detailed account of
migratory birds from across the Himalayas is available right
from the days of Qutabuddin Aibak and the foundation of the
Sultanat of Delhi. The crisis in the Bird Sanctuary at
Bharatpur is exclusively recent and the causes for the same
are neither historical, traditional or "natural".
In other words, not only Agra , Mathura and Firuzabad as
urban centres but the whole region of present day TTZ was
densely covered by vegeation and jungles (Anneex.D) that were
large enough for hunting parties, including those for
elephants and tigers, as well as for waylaying of caravans of
nobles and their murders without anybody ever being caught,
like that of the teacher of Akbar, Bairam Khan. This
vegetation seriously influenced microclimate over large
areas. This factor has been totaly eleminated from the region
today. Influence of such factors has 50 far not been studied
by anybody in the context of the present situation inspite of
the fact that modleling methods and computer facilities, both
hardware and software, are available to us in this respect.
HICROCLIMATIC SITUATION ROUND TAJ DURING MEDIEVAL TIMES

As the land purchased for construction of Taj was a
it, ipso facto had large volume of greenary. There
was an orchard between Taj and the Fort. On the other hand
there were orchards till beyond where the river takes a bend
on the right side of the Taj. In front of the Taj, across the
river, the whole area was covered by imperial gardens and
those of the Mansabdars of high rank. In a word, the 5 i te
where Taj stands today was surrounded by lush green all
around with the river flowing for about 4 miles amidst this
greenary. Detailed descriptions are available in such
contemporary sources as Shahjahan Nama and Amal-i-Saleh,
besides others composed exclusively about details of Taj
construction itself (for Persian extracts and English summary
of the above two sources see M.A.&~sari, 1989, Geographical
Glimpses of Medieval India~ Ed.Jaweed Ashraf & Tasneem Ahmed,
New Delhi). Hence, we may conclude that whi le the region
itself was densely covered with trees, the micro-level
environment all around the Taj was well protected froM heat

Manzil,

19

