.- 7.rrand dust. In a word, conservational elements for Taj an4
other such buildings were put by the architect in the
»uilClinqs ,.,9 well as in the immediate surroundings itself.
Inside the Taj parameter, the front was again covered with
dense fruit trees and large bushes providing not only shade
but also aroma and colour of various flowers and fruits. Only
the immediate space adjacent to walks had flower beds. Area
with only grass growing was totaly absent from Taj compound.
It is only as old as the British cultural influence and their
conservationist/restorational norms.
We may remember that for the medieval times aesthetics
and medicinal factors played much more significant role than
they play today and medieval conciousness of nature was much
stronger than ours. Details 0-£ the vegetation within Taj
parameters
one can see in the lay-out plan that is now
located in the site musueum at Taj itself. As internal
humidity is a function of internal and external ambient
temperatures, these trees in and outside of Taj walls not
only posetively influenced humidity outside but also did so
inside the Taj and adjoining buildings.
NEERI report correctly points out that rise as well as
large fluctuations in ambient temperature harms the building.
Plants, in this context, act as buffers to virtualy keep the
ambient temperature stable. However, NEERI report does not
bring this point out or even hint at its significance.
SOCIO-CULTURAL ASPECT OF TAJ DURING THE MEDIEVAL TIMES

Taj is not just a mausolium or burrial place of the
king and his queen. It has other significance too.
Survey of India documents, now located in the National
Archives of India, explicitly mention the role Taj played in
identification of the three points to construct the basic
triangle for the great triangulation survey of the whole
Bri tish Empi tre in the subcontinent. The other being Jama
Masjid at Delhi and Jama Masjid at Aligarh.
It was also a source not only for providing job to
large scale highly skilled, skilled and unskilled population.
As can be seen from pr imary as well as secondary sources,
these medieval monuments were exper iments in eng ineer ing ,
building design, mathematical innovations, metalurgical
developments, astronomical observations etc. These monuments
played a very important role in the development of var lous
aspects of science and technology during medieval times. Ups
and downs in intellectual attainments and standards of any
given phase of medieval India can today be judged by the
quality of monuments the given period has left.
What we know as Taj Hahal, was predominantly known to
medieval society as Rauza Tajganj, implying socia-reI igious
sacredness for the people. There is also mention of regular
Urs or religious celeberations on a particular date that
continued for some time. This practice seems to have been
discontinued after Taj was taken over by AS!. AS! rul~5 do
not permit active religious performances in protected
monuments. All compromises in this respect are very recent.
20

