River bank opposite Fort and Taj was centre place for
celeberation of rains with Mala and various competitions like
those of ~ite flying, bird and other animal fights, swiming
etc. that have been described in detail by such sources az
Nazir Akbarabadi.
The complex was open to public for offering of prayers
to th2 soul of the king and queen as well as for recreation.
Only on particular days or periods, when family memebrs of
the decendents of Shahjahan and Mumtazmahal were to visit the
place, it was exclusively for the royality.
The fruit from the attached gardens was regularly sold
in the market and the income was used for the upkeep of the
buildings, attached land and its gardens and for paying to
the attendents looking after the monument in various
capacities.
Taj seems to have gradualy aquired an important and
central place in the cultural life of the people of medieval
Agra and retained this status even after the shifting of the
capital to Delhi. The maidan or open space between the Taj
gardens and the ramparts of the Fort played an important role
in this context as Mela was regularly held there.
HUMAN AND ANIMAL DEMOGRAPlIIC ASPECTS OF HEDrEVAL AGRA

It should be noted that medieval Agra according to some
estimates and assesments, had a settled population of about
six lakh; with another estimated one lakh being the floating
population of the city, not counting those who used to come
daily for work in the city but used to live outside the city
in the adjoining villages; and not counting the army enca~ped
outside the city limits in the adjacent gardens and those
comming to the city for periodic inspections and verification
of Dagh done every day according to a rooster. Dur ing the
assembly of troops in preparation of various military
compaigns, and these were not at all infrequent, the number
of persons staying in the city and encamp~ng, along with
their transport men and animals and other paraphernalia, in
the gardens and orchards adjacent to the city, would double,
in all probablity, for periods of upto six months. Agra as a
capital was the most populous city of the medieval world and
in glamour nothing in Europe was comparab 1e to it. I twas
only after the capital was shifted to Shahjahanabad / Delhi
that the population began to dwindle and by the end of the
British empire reached the lowest level of about three lakhs
within the then urban limits. Today it is about 12 lakh.
This dense population in medieval Agra was the
consequence of military stratagic location and trade-commerce
signif icance of the ci ty as it was loca ted on the
intersection of a number of roads coming from Delhi-LahoreLakhnauti and beyond on the one hand and Surat on the other
to get linked with the roads going to Ajrner
Burhanpur and
Bhopal and then going south. It was this recognition of
strategic and commercial significance of Agra that got
reflected in ther very early establishment of railway line
and loco-shed at Agra which
da tes back to 1884
with
I

I

21

