connections going to Bhopal and Bombay on the one hand and
Simla and Calcutta on the other.
Establishment of a
Cantonme~_, and later an air base, of the British army also
points in this direction (National Archives of India,
Catalogue of the historical maps of the Survey of India:17001900, New Delhi, 1975, Ed.S.N.Prasad).
Estimation of animal population, in the best of
circumstances, can only be rough. Some data is given in Aini-Akbari by Abul Fazl for the Mansabdars of various ranks and
for the Imperial houshold. According to this data elephants,
horses, camels, cows, antelopes, leopards, dogs, hunting
birds and other birds such as messanger pigeons, hunting and
singing birds were the main items in the Imperial household.
Large number of these animals, in all probality, were
quartered outside the city limits primarily for graizing and
oth~r requirements. Never theless comments of some European
sources that in Agra leopards roam the streets as cats in
London is indicative of the number of these animals located
in the city itself. However, at a consevative estimate the
animal population with the Imperial household alone would be
about 2000 not counting birds. If we assume that at one time
only 25% of the Hansabdars of various ranks were in the city
and only 10\ of their enti tlernent was with them, an
additional figure of about 40,000 animals not counting milch
animals, dogs ann birds get added up to the above estimate.
In other words, the city accomodated about 60,000 heads of
major animals, and more, belonging only to those who have
been mentioned in the Ain, not counting transit animal
population comming for inspection or for loading/unloading of
goods in the market of the city. One can get an idea of this
animal born trade related animal population from the
statement of Sir Thomas Roe that while on way from Surat to
Agra, he had to stop for 16 hours on the road in order to let
a caravan pass that was comming from Agra and going to Surat.
There were 16,000 bulls in this caravan, besides horses for
accompanying security staff, milch animals and goats etc. for
eating on the way, with each of the bulls carrying a load of
10 man and going at a speed of about 60 Kmph. His comment
mentions that speed of these bullas was not inferior to that
of best horses, and was certainly better than horses in the
UK. With milch and other animals of the traders, artisans,
personal servants, attendents in sarais, messangers etc. the
animal population inside the city limits would turn out to be
more than 200,000 heads, not counting animals brought in for
food. Obviously, the city provided living space to these
animals and fodder and water for them even if temporaryly for
a section of it. Their comming in and going out of the city
would naturally had to be regulated so as not to cause
problems for the population. It was refuse from this
population that in all probablity provIded compost for the
gardens outside and gardens and other vegetation inside the
city limits that a number of sources mention. Gardening
aspects have been discussed by a number of contemporary
sources both in Hindi, Sanskrit and in Persian. It is obvious
that medieval Agra was manualy kept clean and cool.
22

