In this context of conservation of monuments in general
and of Taj in particular, one should remeber another point
that is o~ten ignored in all such discussions~
A culture built a mausolium.
Another culture with high sense of conservation of
hertiqate, i.e. the British, converted it into a monument
with all the consequences it implies.
The Present one, having the seeped in tradition of Kama
and Artha, is making the nonument into a tourist attraction
to earn money, especialy foreign exchange. In fact the
tradition in India has heen to- destroy monuments of other
cults/sects and reliqions to qlorify ones own; to destroy
buildinqs of other kin~ to qlorify oneself. Conservation is
transplantation of concept in a strata that numericaly and
educationaly is confined to a very very insignificant strata.
This transplantation of ideas and practices also means
a drastic change in the categorisation and, consequently, in
the number of visitors and resultant heat and humidity
generation inside the monument and other consequences outside
the parameters.
with removal of vegetation all around and a number of
other similarly negative changes, this increase
in numbers
of visitors and duration of their stay inside Taj itself is
a serious ~actor for harmLul consequences to the monument as
Taj was not built for this usage in mind. This fac.tor has
hardly been paid any attention to so far.
In this sense micro level ecological and socio-cultural
changes that are taking place today have to be seriously
looked into from the point of view of their impact on
conservation of monuments in Agra as well as in TTZ.

NEED

FOR REVIEWING CONSERVATION NORMS AND PRACTICES

ASI has its norms for conservation and routine up keep
of monuments. They also have their conceptual outlooks in
this regard. However, it should be rea 1 ised tha t the norms
and practices, introduced by the Br i t ish a t the fag end of
the last century with their own cultural and conservationist

traditions and ecological experience of UK and aesthetic
norms in the background, need serious revision at least in
the light of the generalisations
hundred year experience under
conditions of India and especialy
. ethico-cul tural condi tions of the

of

the

past

more

than

climatic
and cui tural
under absolutely changed
society, incl uding large
scale removal of vegetation cover, for and through wich this
conservation of monuments is to be done under contemporary
condi tions. Technical competency and skill caliber of the
specialists in the ASI is beyond doubt; they are second to
none in the whole world. However,

it seems time has come to

stremeline and update the attitudinal norms under which the
AS! functions and link it more deeply with climatic
conditions of India itself. I am afraid in the particular
context of Taj, Sikandara, Aitmad-ud-Daula in Agra, and many
other medieval buildings at various places, conservation is
more demanding identification and restoration of

more and

23

