those conservationist elements, like trees and other similar
vegetation veri different fro grass-covered lawns of the
British, t~at were present in the immediate and general
surroundings of the monuments themselves. Vegetation round
Taj, and the deeply felt need for its urgent restoration
underliRes
this
argument.
This
restoration
implies
restoration of the tree component within the boundary also.
It is felt that the ASI should not confuse building
restoration witb restor~tioD of the biotic surroundings and,
in this regard, continue treating British eco-cultural
practices as the last wDrd and only tradition. They have the
professional capability to give lead in this new concept of
biological protectionl c~ngervation of monuments. They have
to, today, sacrifice on photogenic requirements of tourists
to help prolonging the life of the monuments themselves. The
people of India, who have been vocal in their demand for
conservation, should not be seen as opposing such changes in
the surroundings. As pointed out earlier, allover the world
conservational requirements take precedence over any other
consideration. Let this be norm in India too.
AS! today leaves much to be desired in the way it has
reacted to various pulls and pressures from various lobbies
of vested interests and from various sections of different
ministries and individuals especialy under the new pattern of
leadership th~t is now existing. It is not for nothing that
the image of the ASI is far from shining in the eyes of the
general public as well as among the related professionals.
ROLE OF CITY ADMINISTRATION

Some times one is wond~struck about the amount of
hypocracy prevailing about conservation of Taj and prevention
of those elements in the surroundings that cause pollution.
The UP government, and government at the Centre take
extremely tardy steps in implementing the detai led and
voluminous recommendations of various committees, dozens of
whom have gone into this problem and submi tted their
considered reports that are hardly ever been made public.
The
people
of
Agra
through
their
elected
representatives at various politico-administrative levels
beginning with city and upto Parliament, simply make periodic
noises but do not take any ser ious step to get rid of the
abundant squalor and filth that is characterstic of Agra as
an urban centre and one of the serious cause of air pollution
in the whole region. This is also true for the residents of
such holy places as Mathura and Vridavan where f i 1 th and
consequent pollution of the air is so abundant as to be the
main characterstic of the localities.
City administration of Agra is an example par
excellance of ei ther incompetency or hypocracy about Taj
conservation. otherwise one can not explain how it has been
possible to permit or tolerate new and recent settlement not
only on the otherside of the river but right next to Taj
boundary wall. I am refering to officially
sanctione~
settlement in total violation of all Agra Urban Development
24

