documents and Master Plan, known as TAJ NAGRI AWAS YOJNA that
is being planned and developped for a couple of kilometers
along the r:ver bank on the Taj side.
To me it is obvious that the YOJANA is meant to serve
the interests of the big real estate, hotel and tourism
business as well as political sharks of all shades and colour
and the excuse of pollution from MR and industry is a smoke
screen to get as much land and developed
real estate
forecably vacated for these elements
to control and prof it
from. This, at any cost, must stop if Taj is to be saved and
conserved. City administration of the past and the UP
government are directly responsible for all such happenings
all round the nonuments in Agra.
In the light of the past performance of the city
administration as well as of the government of UP the noise
about pollution seems to attract more and more funds. Mojor
part of this amount obviously is not going to be properly
spent for purposes it should be spent on.
SPECIFIC LEGISLATIVE MEASURES AND THEIR COORDINATION IN TTZ
As pointed out above, there is mu-tiplicity of Cl.Vl.C
responsibilities in the TTZ with hardly any machenism for
serious answerability; two states and a number of city
administrations are involved in taking and implementing
various measures having a bearing on pollution control and
monument conservation. Besides, a number of autonoMOUs bodies
and ministr ies get direectly or indirectly concerned with
various steps having a bearing on conservation related
problems. In other words, prevailing
situation,
taken
together with the damaging steps already taken under the
diktats of Ministry of Tourism with full support, total
conivence and submission of all levels of authrities
concerned, warrants the conclusion that there is no
seriousness about either pollution control or conservation of
heritage monuments among all sections concerned. All the hue
and cry by interested parties seems to be for either ulterior
ends of de-industrialisation or for
more and more funds
pumped into Agra in the name of Heritage for them to have
their respective lion's share. Those realy serious about the
issues involved are few and their voice means nothing to the
powers that be. As huge money, both Indian and, as potential,
foreign, is involved, the ground realities manifested in
concrete situation of Agra under present socio-cultural,
political and ethical dispensation can not be otherwise. This
complex situation is made further complicated by property
rights and consequent legal wrangles. In this serious
situation and context there is dire need for:
(a)
specific
conservation
related
legislation
applicable to the whole TTZ to be taken up through identical
texts by the two state legislative assemblies viz. of UP and
Rajasthan as well as of the Centre where such is needed.
(b) Ad interum intervention by the Supreme Court now
ceased with the issue of Taj conservation to (i) stop Taj
Nagri Awas Yojna forthwith, and (ii) to take such steps that

25

