during the intervening period between legislation and
structuration for monument conservation in TTZ, interested
parties mal not take undue advantage to present a fait
acomplis situation.
(c) Checking violation of Agra Master Plan violations;
td) Ban on construction activity and check on building
design ~ithin ~ specified limit round all monuments decleared
to be in the National or International Heritage list.
Ce) creation of an appex body with Legal rights,
duties and answerability procedures, to coordinate all
activity and to monitor with annual submission of repori to
government, agencies and to the Supreme Court concerning
implementation of various decisions and recommendations
concerning pollution control and monument conservation in the
TTZ as a whole. This body should have representation of
public and professionals having expertise in advising and
checking on the implementation of var ious reports and
recommendations.
This appex body should be an Autonomoud body having
legal status, with responsibility and answerability. Its
statutes, rules and regulations to facilitate functioning be
on the model of CSIR with its report put before both state
legislatures and Parliament. Suitable funds be put at its
disposal to act and implement decisions.
SUGGESTED MEASURES OF POLLUTION CONTROL
In the light of the above it is irnparative that the
following urgent measures be taken to remedy the situation:

1. A new BASE-LINE SURVEY of the TTZ should be
conducted to:
(a) consolidate the earlier observations recorded in
NEERI and Rurki University reports and to develop and detail
it further;
(b) to include agro-technological aspects left out
earlier from detailed investigation;
(c) to take into account the present species content
of vegetation within a radius of 3-5 kilometers of outer
walls of the Taj compound and to compare it with contemporary
accounts that are yet available;
(d) to identify land ownership within this parameter
so that greening the area could be taken up in a planned
~anner with people's participation through their education on
involved issues and benifits that will come to them from the
suggested measures.
It is strongly suggested that Planning commission,
especialy the science and technology wing, be aproched for
funding of this phase of investiqa tion and greening of the
whole TTZ in general and Agra in particular in a proper
manner. This effort at greening and suggested Bench Mark
Survey should include not only molecular identification of
polutants but also possible socia-economic and civic sources
that have been hinted at earlier so that not only inventory
26

