of polutants is peoper but that diverse plausable sources for
this are identified, analysed and aportioned their proper
share in damaging processes to then remedy the situation at
apropriate level of administrative structures.
2.. An appex body be constituted
through
proper
legislation in the legislatures of UP and Rajasthan to
coordinante, supervise and be answerable for all pollution
control measure implementation and monument conservation in
the- whole TTZ. This body should override multiplicity of
authority at various levels in the whole TTZ. It should be
answerable to public through state legiSlatures, Parliament
and the Supreme Court. It should function in the manner of an
Autonomous body or agency.
Governments of the respective states and of Centre
should provide sufficient funds to this authority, on the
pattern of CSIR and other similar agencies, to function.
3. Department of environment should be asked to
establish analytical and monitoring laboratory facilities at
Aqra and Hatbura on a permanant basis to monitor and analyse
pollutants in TTZ. This establishment should have mobile
facility to cover the rural sector of the whole TTZ.

4. As the land use pattern as well as the ownership of
the land configuration has drastically changed between even
19th ce-ntury and today;, -tor this change records are
available with apropriate authorities and structures both in
Agra, Mathura, Firuzabad, Bharatpur etc. This change requires
study as on this factor greening the whole TTZ in general and
Agra in particular depends the success or failure of all
efforts at air pollution control in the TTZ. As the right to
property and consequent priveleges,
are an important
consideration with both law and individuals, this assesrnent
would show the extent to which aquisition is necessary and
what other subordinate structures are to be created as the
past experience of various government departments involved in
tree plantations
leaves much
to be desired.
It
is
therefore, imparative that a survey be made of present day
land use pattern and ownership of land in the entire TTZ to
find out, Ca) how much and which land is owned by the state
so that it could be immediately
brought under greening;
(b) how much and which land is technicaly under orchards and
has been diverted from its registered use so that people are
persuaded to restore official use by greening it; (c) on how
much and which land development of orchards is desired from
the point of view of public and consevationist interest in
order to rejuvinate TTZ to its conservationist optimum. Only
after aquisition of this information one can asses the extent
of various options involved in the technicalities of greeing
the TTZ. without wholehearted participation of all sections
of the people of the TTZ itself let us better forget about
any greening of the TTZ as a whole.
5. TAJ NAGRI AVAS YOJNA be totaly liquidated forthwith.
27

