It is amizing the way Master Plan of Agra has been violated
with complete imunity even by the city administration itself.
This cann .... t be without the connivence of the UP state
government. In other words, the UP state government is
implici tly party to various violations not only of the
conservationist priniciples required for preservation of Taj
and other monuments in the UP teretory of Agra and Mathura
{about Rajasthan one does not know as Bharatpur is not in the
limelight either of press or of the NGOs).

6. No settlement be allowed upto 5 kilometers of Taj on
either

side on the river bank as well as on the opposite
side. IL felt unavo~able, th& Supreme Court should issue an
ad interum order banning such settlements till a suitable law
is p~ssed by an apropriate legeslature. The goal to achieve
is NO SETTLEMENTS WITHIN SPECIFIED AREA ROUND MONUMENTS,
BEGINING WITH TAJ, AITHAD-UD-DAULA, SIKANDRA AND AGRA FORT as
such settlements at a later date shall prove much bigger
social and legal prob~em for conservation under the changed
ethico-cu~tural dispensation. In this context role of powerbrokers and politicians of all shades and hues should not be
unde-re-stimated.
In this context one may point out that vote-bank
concept, applicable to un-authorised colonies round Taj, not
at all unknown in other cities in various contexts I and
control of various civic bodies by the same interested
parties and elements right upto state leve l, with th is
control, used by interested parites for generating politicoadministrative
pressures
for
so-called
demands
for
conservation of Taj through de-industrialisation and without
any regard for the working people, would nullify all attempts
from any quarters to preserve monuments in the TTZ. Hence it
is imparative to know how much, and where, the state owns so
as to begin from there and, with education to persuade the
owners of various land pieces to change from low vegetation
profile (grazing, fallow or agricultural) to high vegetation
profile viz. orchards etc.
In the light of the above one should realise that
creation of orchards implies sale of the produce as otherwise
no body will opt for it. During medieeval times the king or
the noblees, who owned such orchards, would consume the
products or get it marketted and the pea sent would earn the
gratiude for innovations in terms of not only praise but also
monitorily. Under changed dispensation one has to not only
assure but buil t into corresponding structures this element
of sale of the produce to make the plan realy workable and to
get people owning this land interested in developping
orchards from the point of view of their own economic
interest. In this context the orchards developped on
government lands can act as attractants in the same manner as
in Agriculture when new var:ieties are introduced f~r ~he
first time. Demonstration 15 a better way of convIncIng
people than any amount of lectures by any body.
As the state government is overtly populist, i.(' t~J:C5
decisions with an eye to election consequences, it is a
28

