substantial question of law if in pub~ic interest as summed
up in the present letigation itself, either the state or the
.Supreme C..,urt can introduce a change in the land use pattern
of the TTZ region or not. Irreespective of this legal aspect,
it is desirable that the masses are educated about the need
for conservation and its various aspects that concerns them.
It is buggested that efforts be made on serious scale
to educate the people about conservation of monuments in the
TTZ so that they are persuaded to shift from one pattern of
land use tu another, i.e. from agricultural to orchards. If
necessory, state, either of UP or of India, should devise
schemes to give incentives to cultivators to make such shifts
~o that they do not suffer economic loss during the transit
phase that may last from 7 to 10 years.
7. A barage be constructed to increase water in that
sector of Jamuna that lies between the railway bridge on the
one hand an~ bend of Jamuna down streme adjacent to Taj. The
parameters and details be worked out in agreement with the
AS! as such rise in water level in all probablity would
affect the foundation of the monument and its surroundings.
Available data far such situations suggests that any
improvem-ent in water in the river is likely to elevate
underground water table and, consequently,
affect the
monument per see As a consequence of elevated level of water
in the river, sand damage that is abundantly visible on the
river side shall get reduced.
8. As recommended in the Report of the UP Governnent
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Commissioner of Agra
(p.20), gas should be supplied to TTZ cities, begining with
Aqra, for all such purposes where today fossil fuel is being
used, including industry and various traditional professions
like sweetmeat making etc.
9.

In order

to sharply reduce diesal

use

in TTZ,

it

should be seen that electricity to TTZ is regular and without
any serious breaks. So long this step remain wanting, the
generators shall have their utility and diesal pollution can
not be controled. Besides, in this context, recommendations
of the said UP government committee about by-passes and
diversions in Aqra be fully implemented. As no similar data

is available for Mathura, Firuzabad and Bharatpur, the matter
of survey should be immediately taken up with the help of UP
end Rajasthan governments and the recommendations regarding
transport load-shedding and de-desalisation of the atmosphere
emerging out of such investigations, be fully implemented.
Even if the common Grid of electricity may be
visualised to supply un~nterrupted electicity to TTZ t~rou9h
the machenism of gettlng the power from wherever It lS
available in the system, and knowing the example of Delhi
break-downs, one would like to consider captive el~ctrical
generation for TTZ simply to guarnntcc this supply In order
to reducee not only fossil fuel consumptiopn but also to
eleminate 'fall back' and
'to be on the safe side' attitude
29

