of the people in relation to electicity supply that is the
basis for diesal generator menia in the city.
Once
uninterrup~ed electricity supply is guaranteed, many problems
of pollution of Agrra would get solved by themselves as these
are primarily based on uncertainities of power.
It goes without saying that all steps would cost money.
It ther-e is no desire to mobilise money resources for one
raaaon or the ,otber, letnus then forget about pollution
~ontrol. Under such dispensation making industry into a scape
goat or bete noir is simply immoral.
1Q. For a lonq-time various proposals have been with the
state I central governments to create diversions and bypasses to Aqra in order to avoid consequences of passing
traffique. These suggestions and plans should be immediately
taken into consideration and, irrespective of costs, transit
load on Agra be eleminated from entering the city.
11. To immediately control sand damage to Taj, past
practice of auctioning space opposite Taj on the r1ver bank
between railway bridge and bend of Jamuna beyond Taj, be
revived with immediate effect for cUltivation of vegetables
and cucurhits as such coultivation would control sand erosion
and sand damage to the monument. steps be urgently taken to
convert the whole bank opposite Taj into an orchard or garden
for public recreation in order to evolve permanant solution
to sand damage to the monument. It may be recalled that such
cUltivation of vegetables and cucurbits to control sand
erosion and SPM content of the air is an age old practice
that goes back to medieval times on record. The Br i tish
continued this practice through out their rule.
12. Efforts be made to electrify
internal
public
transport in Agra in general and within the monument zone in
particular through introduction of regular Trolibuses where
possible and electrical batary operated buses, as used in
Delhi, where public transport is not feasable. A certain area
round Taj be decleared as fossil fuel free zone and within
this zone no solid or liquid fossil fuel be permitted.
13. Proposal of Commissioner's report regarding ring
railway in Agra is fesable due to availability of lines. It
should be immediately taken up.

/J
\ weed Ashra f )--/.
ofessor
hool of Life ~iences

Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi-110067

30

