or as orchards and gardens, discussed elsewhere, had some thing to
do with this norm

25

. It was this traditional norm that sustained

ecological- balance under

conditions of

continuous

expansion

of

urbanisation and agriculture. Agra seems to be an example of how
natural

condi tions

technological

were

development

used
(

to

keep

metalurgy,

the

consequences

brick-klins

etc.)

of

under

control. Though not paid due attention so far, ecological aspects
of medieval urban centres deserve serious and detailed attention
of scholars to draw lessons from a number of past practices in
this respect which are implicit in their urban lay-outs, building
design and environmental planning.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES AND FOOT-NOTES
1. Abdullah, Tarikh-i-Daudi, (Ed.) S.A.Rasheed, Aligarh l'lusli:-University, Aligarh, p.216-217. It details the Manzil in the
following words, " And for the help and comfort of the wayfarers
who had no place to live in, sarai were constructed on the
roads ide at every two kroh ... There
were in all onethousand
sevenhundred sarai on the roadsides of all roads going to to all
parts ... and in every sarai there were rooms for both hindus and
muslims; there were pots full of (drinking) water for everyone
to partake his fill. In every sarai everywhere there was cold and
hot water for the hindus (to take their every morning bath in all
seasons), cots, food, fodder for the cattle and other animnls. It
was also ordered that in these sarais anybody who entered to stay
shall be given food and fodder at the cost of the state. And
round every sarai villages were settled and in every such
locality there was built one brick-lined well, a mosque where one
Moazzin and one Imam was appointed; there also was appointed one
Shehna and a few persons to look after the sa fty and secur i ty.
Everyone of the persons so appointed was provided with madad-irna'ash near by in the vicinity of the sarai itself. There always
were two horses in every sarai, ready to take the news of the
road everyday ... On both sides of the road shady fruit trees were
planted so that during summers the wayfarers could travel under
their shade and if so desired, rest on the way and tie their
animals under the shade ... " This passage may be tat:en as
representative for the broad contents of the term man~il as used
during the entire med ieva I per iod. For tree planta tlons on the
roadside during medieval times see: Ziauddin Barni, (Ed.) Sy~rj
Ahmed Khan, 1862, Tarikh-i-FiruzslJahi, Calcutta, p.442 for tree

10

