and around monuments and in this process try to restore as much
as possible the original

~lora

of the rnonurn€nt gardens.

We hav.e to realise that what we consider today
tourist

attractions

and

siqnifican-t

country are buildings that

wer~meant

cultural

heritage

to

of

be
our

for purposes very different

from what we are using them today. Hence special care is required
to identify the new

d~mands

that are being

ma~

on them so that

additional and corresponding elements could either be put in the
oorkeesurroundings or apropriate corresponding

steps

are

taken

their proper conservation commensurate with these additional
demands.

Bibliographical References And Footnotes
1. R. Sengupta, 1994, Pollution Managemen t Of Konarak Tempi e
Sit-e, Paper presented to Nat.Conf.On Env. Pollut.& Preserv.of
Hist. Monuments. New Delhi, Oct.31st-Nov.lst.

2. Ministry of Environment & Forests, 1993,Air Pollution Studies
to Redefine Taj Trapezium Coordinates, New Delhi,p.27-28i also see
B.N.Tondon, 1994,Air Polution And Taj, paper presented to
Nat.Conf.on Env.Pollut. & Preserve of Hist.Monum.ibid. All such
studies have underlined the role of high temperatures play in

damaging the stone. Other factors acting synergistically simply
accentuate basic damaging effects.
3.Bhandari,M.M., 1994,The Role of Plants in Nullifying Air
1994, Paper presented to Nat. Conf. On Env. Pollute &
Preserv. of Hist. Monuments. New Delhi, ibid; Shashi Dhawan, 1994
Vegetation As Pollution Sink, paper presented to Nat. Conf .On
Env.Pollut.& Preserve of Hist. M~numents.ibid. These authors give
lists of plants that have been experimentaly found to be sinks
for various pollutants and absorbers of dust. Among such listed
plants there are ones that have been mentioned in the lay-out
plan of Taj on display in the site museum. Besides, some of them
are also mentioned as being growing in Agra. Ain list of timber
sold in the market also includes a large number of those in the
list. Palas (Butea monosperma), Shisham (Dalbergia sissoo), Tendu
(Diospuros melanoxylon),
Neem (Azadirachta indica), Sagowan
(Tectona grandis), Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) , Kaner (Nerium
indicum), Kadamb (Anthocephalu5
cadamba) ,Gulmohar
(Delonix
regia), Shahtoot (Horus alba), Kathal (ArtocarpU5 heterophyla),
Bel (Aegle marmelos) siris (Albizzia lebbek), Limu (Citrus
Pollution,

24

fa

