66

HUmoA Habitatron: Culture

Enuiron'......dt Inttrface

preY路; "with male and female elephants,tt etc. He recommends
locating such '{orests't in some cases "on the extreme limits of
the country or in any other suitable locality. fI It is also
recommended that in some situations such 'forests' should be
"walled with only one opening Cor entrance".
These observations make it clear that in such fforests'
soclluly acceptable fruits and other useful plants are dominant.
In some cases, like those for elephants. food type requirements
imply that particular plants are either preferably preserved or
planted in large numbers to satisfy the needs of the animals.
In any case these are not just. ordinary forests as we normally
understand by the term.
In t.he very beginning of Book 2. the author makes it quite
clear that this ({orest' is not meant for grazing animals. He
points out that "pastures Bre to be made on uncultivable
lands."
These 'forests' are quite sharply demarcated from what is
tenned as "game forest with fame beasts, open to all". These
are not even reserved hunting grounds for thl! king.
What is this 'jangala-? What is the content of the term 'forest'
in Kautilya?
It IS quite obvious from the text that what is described is not
just wild plant growth untouched by man. These (forests'
appear to be planned, often purposefully designed and well
protected areas. Obviously. the term here menns something
quite different from what we normally understand by it.
It should be noted that in Book 2, Chapter XV, the same term
is used in the sense we normally use it - wild natural dense
plant growth untouched by man. From such 'forests' products
are collected and socially consumed.
Use of the snme term for two different types of plant
association - one natural and the other artificial or quasinatural - may indicate that there is some common denonunntor equating the two on some basis. What is this basis?
The only charncterstic common to both types appenrs to be
plant density per unlt area. It seems the term Jangala in
Kautilya designates 8 certain density of plants per unit area
without which the plant growth cannot be designated as 8
jangala. For Kautilya it appears to be immaterial what species

Con~pt of FO"'$t

67

in KQutilyo

grow, or for what use the product is put to. What seems to
matter isjus~ the number orpl~ts in a given area. Without this
understanding Ule p8.SS$gea referred t.o do not at all make any
sense.

This understanding provides for

8

smooth and harmoniolls

transition from n~tura1 wUderness to cultlvated gardens;
without much change ~ the number of plants we switch over to
a new type of land use. Frot;l h~re to other types of lund use the
transitions elso Jlppear to be smooth and gradual.
lfwe look at the concept of nature in clsssicallnQian thought

we find tqe ouUook to be very Cnatural'. Though conscious
nature conservation does not appear to be very prominant. it is
implie4 in the concept of a specialised Hell for those who
uselessly destroy plants. It is also implied in the benefits. both
material and 811iritual. mentioned for those who construct
tanks, gardena. shady resting places around temples, etc. It. is
part of the religioua outlook. Being a product of this classic.al
Indian tradition, Chanakya deals with Cforests' in the same
manner and spirit.
A close look at this understanding brings out ~oth.er
implied concept: that of soil conservatiop. Soil conservation
being a function ofpl8llt density per unit area, it is immaterial
what the species growing on it are 80 long 88 the densIty
remains optimum. We need not argue how both extremes of 8
normal distribution curve of plant density per unit area would
be less productive as well as less efficient in conservation. From
this point of view 8 change in species, or in their dontinance
relationship would not affect classification inspite qf change in
economic ,tatus. We may also recall that very higb denSIty
would actually be less productive due to overlap Llnd consequent reduction in the efficiency of solar energy' and nutrient
utilization.
Recommendation that such 路forests' should be located at the
edges of cities and other urban settlernents underlines their
role in defence. R.aut.ilyan 路foTe~ts路 are apparently of multipurpose benefit to society.
Thus, we find cultivated forests forming 8 transition from
natural forests by changing species while keeping the density
the same. Garden or orchard would be the next step. The

