68

Human Habllatlon' Culture En

,nmcmr Interfact

concept of per unit area would make all types of gardens fall in
lwe from the pOInt of \PJew of nuture conservatIon. TheIr
d.t.fl'erence would be lD theIr econonuc returns. This understandtng removes the sharp tWISts and turns between vanous
types of land usc.
Recalhng the fact that even cultivnled land had quite a few

trees planted in and nround them for purpo!;es of shade and
tYlng of n.nlmals as wt!ll as for den18rcat.ion of t.erntory, etc.,
furt~er blunts the sharp dIstInction between agricultural and
hortIcultural land use Even transitIOn Into road and village
areas npp~n.r not so very sharp as we normally tend to thInk.
Conservational aspect of tIllS fact should be rather obvlOus
Kautilya's mention of ' soma forests' provokes one to thlnk in
~erms of these Aforests' being used for trying plant introduction
mlo ne\\' areas "where they earher dId not. grow". Secord Rock
EdIct of Emperor Ashok& IS an example in mind. In thIS edlct
Ash~k.n very exphcltly mentIODs that he got large number of
medicmal plants Introduced and gro~\'n in areas where these
were earlier not growing. Naturally. such a situatIon \\'ould
de~d protected growth condItIOns till, firstly, these plants
acqUIre SOCial acceptance und. secondly. t.ill large amount is
available for distribution so that eftch may grow his own supply.
Cultivated 'forests' would ofTer thE' best. alternate that is
nearest to natural conditions but provides protection. We
should recs.ll that even during the medieval period, 8 large
number of medictnal herbs were cultivated in large or small
walled gru:dells along y.'lth a number of trees. Often mnrgins of
natu~al wilderness were used for such purposes, bringing the
practice very near to the one inferred from Kautilya.
There is another very interestIng aspect to the above
trndllion. In a modifierl form it is renected in the {irman of
Akbar. the ~lughal En~peror, that was issued by him on the
constructlOD of H1SSQI F eeroUl Canal. This canal was origtnally
constructed by Feero7. Tughlaq. However. when it got lnto
dlSuse, Akbar revived it. The /ir"Lan makes use of two older
concepts: economic concessIOns to those who contribute their
labour for the construction of canal nnd plantation of high
qunlity fruit. trees alJ along the two sides of the canal. The first
order bas obvio,!s economic advantage for the treasury. The

Concept of Forest In A"UUI.YO

69

second ODe ~o.s been explained as follows: good qun1~ty free fruit
attract. people to the banks for rest and enjoyment; they
wUllmme.dlllte.ly report nny damage reqwring repmrs, damage
would be ldcnllflcd nt. an early stnge so that still larger damnge
1S nvoided. Moreover, the dellser the roots. the more fu-mlv tIle
embankment soil would be held. It is quite obvious thvl"botb
medlevo.l and ancient periods were not Ignorant of the role
roots played in retruning soil.
Any account of almost any big urban centre in Indio. would
show l~rge ~eas designated as 'forests' or 'gardens' all around
it \Vhll~ much tram the ancient period he.s perished. accounts
ofShahJahanabad or the Walled City of Delhi are still available
m their origillal. They point out deliberate and planned
locatIOn of such areas around the settlements. Kautilv8 can be
conceptually superimposed upop such medieval sett1ements.
~nce the transition appe'U"s to be so gradual, we nre not
Justified in considering all areas designated asjanga/s in the
same vein as we do today. For such a planned city as
ShnhJahanabad, were they not put there specifically Cram the
point of view of their role in tempernture regeme and soil
conservation? The point needs fresh and detailed study.
Arthashastro underlines an important aspect: nature .conservation and economic benefit. are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. One can acquire benefits from nature and at the
same time COI1$erve it. After aU Nature is not. static. Even
species' composition goes on tbanging over time. Kautilyan
concept of Nature is also npt static. In this sense it is really very
'natural'. He does not stop change. He seems to direct it into
more benefi~ ~annels. His concept of'rore~t· or Jan~a1a is in
fact Nature In lts gradual and sloW transitIons with better
results due to conscious channellsation.
Our wrong understanding of Kautilya seems to be the result
of our imposition of 8 lnte-nineteenth century European
concept on n very cUfferent lndio.n cultural situation Even in
Europe, immediately afler the fifteenth century. there were
planned or cultivated trorests' round such important urban
centres as Paris. Vienna. Rome. Berlin, Petersburg (now

w~ll

Leningrad), Amsterdam, etc. They can stUl be seen in parts.
Only lined growth of trees and planned footpaths distinguish

