70

Hulf'UZlt Habitation: CultW"e

,ironment lnterfact

them from natural wilderness. These are 'Corests'. But these
are artificial 'rorests'. Gradual transitions 8eem to be common
in all societies that care Cor Nature. It is not exclusive to India.
It is only when everything is turned into a commodity for sale
and benefit. is counted in terms exclusively of money that the
problems begin.

2
CUltural DltfusioD and Transformation of
Habitat in the Malwa Region - India
R. Y. ,"",.

The archaeological evidences, gathered through excavations
during the last three decades have opened new vistas to the
historical geographers interested in the problerns of cultural
diffusion in ~dia. Thele evidences thtt)w enough light on the
spatial and temporal tranafot"%D4tioh oftbe habitat eystem. The
Malwa Region haa been a notable area tor the transformation of
cultural complex•• by trana-resional adaptations. Three spatl.otemporal difTu.uon episodes are recopised in tile ligh t of which
sequent occupance and transformation of habitat have been
studied. During the whole period of diffusion with long gaps
between fU'st and third episode (approximately 1.000 years)
separating two types of urbanisationa. the region has functioned as a great eelective filter in cultural diffusion.
It is hypothesized that. undoubtedly, ·give and take'
principle has been in operation between various corridors of
cultural diffusion, that iI, Malwa-Ganga-Punjab. or geometrically, in cyclic fashion but starting from the west. Though
the early settlers were living in pits and cave dwellings, later on
they lived in houses with several rooms. The dwellings were
built witb defmite plana and the settlements had a certain
layout. The present habitat refiecta the impact of physicocultural and socio-ecunomic-cultural milieu.

Introduction
Cultural diffusion implies mobUity and migration of ethnic
groupa from a hearth. the place of origin. to the place of
destination. The distribution nnd spread of the people are well

