S6

JAWEED ASHR-,P

source' indicating that tlil the reign of Jenangeer, dephent'i \H:re found In
the areas recorded in the Ain. Even as late as the eIghth decade of the 19th
century Buchanan' records the presence of elephants in the Patna di-stnct
indlcatmg that the distnbution DC elephants by that tlme had not changed
so completely. The contradictIon between Blochman and Patna district
report reterred to above needs more- detatied lnvestig:ltion. It is to be
nOled that sources other than AiD are not verj specific on the subJect
under discussion.
Tiger fares better in the account,. In such areas a.s Mathura and
Panipa4 tiger hunts of Shabjehan bave been recorded-. Even dunng
'he reign of Aurangzeb tiger was hunted m these areas'. Latter
accounts!' indIcate that the distribution of tIger has Men much WIder
than that recorded for today. Thus the crucIal period for the destruction
of tiger can broadly be narrowed down to the pFesent century.

Sipiftcaace of the Compantift Data
It can be taken as a (act that major changes in the distribution of
lpecially of the tieer and elephants, toolc place primanly in
the- second half of the Jast century and overRew into the present century.
It seems quite probable tbat this change in the distnbution pattern does
not imply that thc animals have miara tcd to other localities. There can
be only two possible explanations or this fact: either the climate has so
drastically changed in the past eight decades so that the forests disap.
peued due to naturaL causes or. that the animals have simply been moved
down and the forests have btm cut down to give way to agricultural e:<..
pansion duriog the recent past. Animal-Jungle relattons and de-pendence
being what it is, either way If the process be-gms, the end result is disappea.
ranee of both. That this has happened is very obvious.
~;Id.animaJs,

Before beginning thc discussion on the reasons for the drastic change
in thc distribution of wdd animals. \\c have to make two points explicit.
Firstly, presence oC these animals and reports of their hunt indicate that
the area was predominantly & rorest territory and the logic of food rela..
6.

1.

L
,.

10.

IChwaja gampi' Hut.fa. (Ed. Azra AJvi). M.'Jir-i-JaIIDnPi (1978). Centre el
Mvanced Stud,. Dept. 0( History. AMU. Alicarlt. p. 162Buc:haun. All A«oMI.{'" Df.rtrlct.r 0/&_ I11III PtIIItII fa 1111..1811.
VollT. Boob In· v, p. 40$.
Tbcre are a Dumber of refereaea. •• ,. For Mathura see bwI-I..s.JJII, Vol. I.
p.623. (\)f Paaipal see Vol. UL ,.191..
UawItir./.AlQIIfIin. ,. 31-39.
For tbna cIotailt ,_ "*'-iIIIIIII WlIIlU/. &&~I(I~ Vol II. pp. 2413-

'ruei,

~J6.

