.,tw ANtWAL$

IN ItmWAL IUNDUSTAN

S9

\-isuali:s-ing the type of forest and its productivity to sustain the elephants. TheiT herds have been reported to be as big as of "upto a thomand

or

clephants·~. Age
the elephant is estimated to be ··one hundred and
twenty years·.... It is known that elephants eat a large variety of
'Vegetation but not indiscriminately. Thetr food consists of various grasses, frult~, leaves tbat are fresh, mostly of the type that grows -in subtropical pumanent or evergreen forests like banana, sugarcane, mahwa etc~ It
As It IS at present confined to coconut growing reglon. coconuts are
con:ildered to be its favounte food. ConsIderinG the herd habIt, sleepmg
requIrements referred to above and the type of food. it can be conduded
that, unltke the ti£er, elephants are to be found only in dense perennial
troplcat or subtropical forests WIth heav)' ramfall or large supplies of
permanent fiowlng "aler.

From the above data taken from historical sources when coupred
"'llh modern and verifIed knowledge of ecology, one can draw Some
in(ereslmg conclusions as summarised below. Forest Hne in the period
under discussion and the nature of forests in the area under diSCUSSion
was very much different from what it is today.

Ecological ChaDge
Naturally the question arises as to why the animals dlsappeareci from
the territory that they were occupying oncc. It can be seen from the
information given above that the disappearance in case of tiger 1S ~o
'Very recent that evolutionary or slow ecological but natural cbanges can
not account for it, while in case of elephants too It is about a century
old, a scale too short for either biological or geological changes to
account for it. It seems that both, changes in land use as well as socio~onomico-techno'llglcal factors, played their dommant part in ellmi·
nating these apexes of two different types of food pyramIds taken as a
sample study to estabhsh and verify tbe method enumerated and leslcd
in this study.
The period under discussion is fun of evidence to show that massi ve
expansion or agriculture led to large ~cale deforestation. Large and
dense forests have been recorded. for example. in the Subah of Malwa
dUring the reign of both Shahjehantf and Aurangzeb u . Larae areas
24.
2S
16.
'21.
28.

Abul Fazl, Am+A4bQrt, lr. &. cd. S. L Goumer. 1&71, p. 130.
lbad, p. 118
Ibid. p 112
A"'I1I·,.salll•. 192). Blbhotheca Indica, 'Vol ~ p_ 110.] 11.
MohamrMd Saql Mustald Khan Ed.Aaha Ahmed All. 1871, Ma'QllUr.l-Alamcill..

p.

44a--4~9.

