60

JAWE1!D ASHRAf

under ror~"s that were very dense have been rerord<!d a~ late as the end
of the last century by Tod for Rajasthanlt , J. region that today IS
considered to be highly and and semi-desert. Shlftmg forest JUTe can
be ~en by comparing the late 18th century Ime ,Iven by Rennel for East
(ndia- with that given for lat~ 19th century by the Gantleer of India,
Map Votume*l. There- is concrete evidence to show that the reclama.
tion of forest land had a pt'Cmium in the form of special concession given
to such penon" throughout the period under dISCUSSlon14• Encoura·
gement to forest cutting seems to be the otTisiaJ policy of the time. This
must have fed to serious- shrinking in rorestlands~ leading to dISappear.
ante of these forests and these animafs from considerable part of the
empire. But this d-ear;ng of the iorest5---is by Jtsdf not s-ufflclCnt to
ac:count (or the big change In such :I vast are.L
We should reCllI that introduction of gun tta1Uformed the baute
field rather fundamentally. Its introduction It'd to enormous e~panSlon
of the kJIling power of hunter~. But then tlus introduction of a r:cw
technology was much earlier to the periud in which these ammaJs se.em
to have disappeared tota-Uy. Though it may have increased the amount
of kill, the gun cannot be made responsible for ellmmation of (lgefs- and
elephants. Blaming the technology per se would be to delude one-self. Increase in number of killings would have been taken care of by
the machanisms of automatic adjustments of vanous population levels.
CuUtng of foresrs would have restricted the spread. None of these can
account for total disappearance as seen today. The facts imply the
existence of a social structure or a value·framework that conserved
nature either condous.y or unconciously. Their disappearance JmplJes
the breakdown of this framc:\\oork altogether.
There is evidence to show that tiger could only be hunted by the
monarch himself or, In case of others, even if a queen. by his permission.
Punishment (or the violation o( hunting norms was death". These
hunting norms not only identified the animals that mayor may not
be hunted, and areas where they could' not be hunted (reely, but
29.

30.

1I.
12.
D.

James Tod. IImttlb _ MliqMiti#s til RtI}tIsI.... J97•• JC. M. N. Publishers. New
Delhi. p. $28-529.
James Renne"', Mtmoi, 0/11 !rio, ./ HiMlIJItIII (1r I~ MUIMI Empi" (reprint
edition. 191$): 8. P. Ambashthya, N. V. Public::allons. Lohanlput. Patn-).
sheel- VUI.
The I",PBiII/ GlIZlftHr ./Iltdill. Vol. XXVl-Atllll, 1909. Oxr"rd Oareocton Pres.,
New Edidon. plate-So
~..,~. Muslafaal Publisbin. House, J(anpur.19SS RuqfGII No. M.
n.1IIk~..JlllM:llllttri p.l86; Bernier p.37S.

