WILD ANIMALS IN MEDieVAL HINDUST AN

61

also identified many other restrictions that were sanctified either by
religious or secular edicts and considerabuns". While some of these
considerations have been recorded as shown in documents, it is quite
probable thai such matters of common knowledge and .agreement were
not all put down though all of them were practiced. 10 this sociocultural mclieu gun had very sma!! destructive-effect so far as animals
were concerned. This point IS borne out by the fact that total number
of tIgers hunted by Jehanseer in hiS life lime between the age of J 2
and 50, were only 88 u . This number stands nowhere to the total
of 1000 hunted by the Maharaja of Udaipore or of 1500 killed by the
Maharaja of Surguja h • IndJscnminate hunting by all and sundry during
the r.ecent past bestowed upon the gun that determmmg significance
that changed the total balance against tbe tiger. May be that the pr-es-ent
survival and Wider spread as compared to the elephant is due to his
eatmg hablls of Wide spectrum and non.fastldious Iivmg requirements,
makmg It possible to lave anywhere on any pray.

While the reasons for the disappearance of the tiger can be seen
rather clearly, the elephants pose some problems. They were not only
hunted for their tusks" but also played an important role in the wars
that changed the political map of the country. Bemg slO\~er breeders and
producmg smaller htter with a longer period of embryonal development,
the elephant had all !he clements loaded against him in the battle for
survivel once the dye was cast. Number of elephants in the army of
Akbar was enormous. Mtlitary significance of elephants in those days
could hardly be mer estimated. Because of these reasons Akbar v,as
the first in InoJa who Introduced elephdnt breedtnll, something that was
considered (0 be undesirable before N • The long time taken for the
maturity of the antmal after birth- in all probability kept the army
dependent upon catch from the natural reserves and Wild state as the
major source for the supply. Besides the emperor, others at the
lower rung had their own supply from sources thut have not always been
idenllfied. leavmg the pO"lbJl,ty of hunts open The details with which
elephant huntlOg triCKS have been recorded strengthens the POSSibility
that catchmg In the Jungle Yo as an important f.ource of replenishment of
14.

35.
36.
37
3&.
39.

Tuzak-~-}'hanlurl P 41-42, IbId 204-205,

Atn4-Akbori (Vol. I. Book. II.
p 292 308}. Ak.b.ar· Nama (Yol III p. 333).
Tu:ak~-}tlsallft"" p )91 92.
Guy Mountrort (19SIJ. Sum't fit. Tile,., p.70.
Am vol i p 117
Aln Vol I p Jl6
Ib,d p t2t.- J27

