62

JAWEED ASHRAP

Jupphes at all level4i. Besides war, elephant "as a source of lr4rul'Cr t
and entertatnment-. The scale of mvoh-ement could be ,uessed from
the fact that there were 101 elephants in the Khat:sa or Royal Personal
Possesionfl. It is understandable that in any war of consequence
their loss would also amount to hundreds, if not thousands in a short
lpan of timeU. PUUin, all facts toge-ther, it is not improbable- rhat
ivory bunting (poaching) at later ye:lrs and Jong wars during the reign of
Sh:lhjehan and Aurangzeb and later, must have taken a very heavy toU
that could not be compensated naturally due to slow breeding. Besides,
both during the reip of Shahjehan and Aarangzeb, large tracts of
forests 1RfC-clcaredilt the Subahs where Am mentions elephants (AJmer,
MaIwa. Orissa, Allahabad, etc), thus forcmg the an.mal s to gradually
retreat as the clearing advanced wilh time. AU this coupled with the
introduction ofthe gun- in. a changed iOClo-cultural meheu decided the
fatc.. of the elephants. They just disappeared. Being less ~ide in choice
of food and environment they bad no way, like tiger, to move out and

survive.
CoacJusiODs

It can be concluded from the above djscu~sion that during the hIstorical period much has~hanged in Hmdustan. Hlstoncal records can go a
long way to provide informataon concernang the e~o'oglca f conditIO"" of the
trmes gone by and offer some very interestang po~sib'lHles for the rcconstruetrOD of the ecological past of HlOdu~tan, naturally Within rC.1Sonable
limits uncertainty. This information. when processed, can go a long
way in belping us to understand the dynamiCs of natural changes, the
result of which we see every day. Furthermore, this makes it possible to
separate man-made causes from natural causes an the e\olutloo of the
environment of the past. Once mapped out, we can have the time series
to reconstruct the past that will help us In assessing our natural resource
potential for various zones. It is hoped that thiS method and utilisation
scientific informatioD thus generated, wou ld throw vrry interesting

or

or

light on the changin, "altern of man-nature relationship during the
Medieval period in India .

.to.
41.
42.

A'n. Vol. I, p.134-139.
Ibid. p. 137-1)8.
S~ MIIIfIIWtU K4ItIm of Shiv Du Lukhnawi Tr. by Syed Hasan Asksn,.

pl.

