- 3 -

today

(Pl-ate I

-

all

photographs

taken during

February

1995).

Ouality of marble used at a11 the places in Taj is not uniform.
The

.good

quality white marble has

been used for

around cenotaph and the lower floral designs. All

graves,

thes~

Jali

areas can

be brouqht to original by simple bentonite and water cleaning. On

rest Gf the area marble used has bands of inherent impurites and
hence have different shades (PLate 2). The corridor and interior
portions of Taj have remained ne9lected for centuries and so it
bas turned yellowish due to deposition of dust, dirt and entrape.d
smok~ emitted by burning of candles, incense sticks and the smoke
emitted by different modes
around Taj in the past, prior to
stopping ~oal engines at Agra Fort. Railway yard and the Thermal
Power House, etc. The exterior parts of cenotaph of Taj has- the
same whit-e lusture as before. Apart from rains,

cleaning of r.Paj

bas been mostly from outside in the past.
There is evidence right from early days soon after completion of
Taj upto as late as now that rain water was seeping through domes
and arches. During the seeping of water, it has entered the main
structure built of Lahheri bricks and lime plaster, which in turn
has dissolved the soluble parts of the material used. This has
resulted in some permanent staining and weakening of marble from
inside where ever it has remained stagnated behind the inlaid
marble slabs and also on where it flowed over through the joints
and on the floor (Plates 3 & 4). It has caused some permanent
e
damage like rusting of dowels, joint pins and disintegrat~ of
marble surface near joints. All this has already happened in the
past

and

now complete water

tightening

of

roof

and

walls

is

urgently required.
Biological weathering is occurring fast at Taj Mahal. Right at the
base of cenotaph, algal blooms (Myxophycease) are coming up (Plate
5).

en

the outer walls and domes both on sandstone and marble

structures, algal blooms and even angiospermic plants have started
invasion (Plastes 6, 7 and 8). All this directly proves that S02_
in the atmosphere is not in effective lethal dose.

