Public llealth Concerns
As regards health effect component, no secondary data was collected because issue
and scope of the study was different and total span avaliable for the study was only six
months including data analysis / modelling I report preparation. However, earlier
epedemiological studies were carried out at Bombay can be cited as a case from a prospective
survey on 4129 subjects in 3 urban (high, medium & low according to S02 levels) areas and
urban and rural communities.(Bombay Air Pollution - Health Study, 1984 page no. 15 & 35)
"The effects are seen at S02 levels between 40-60 ug/m3 as yearly mean and SPM
levels around 250 ug/m3 and N02around 15-20 ug/m3 are probably due to added enhancement
by factors of housing, econnomic factors, cooking fuel and nutrition. Thus, there seemed to
be highly significant trend for health morbidities in the urban communities to fluctuate with
S02Ievels."

Fuel Emission Inventory

o

NEERI study primarily concentrated on the current gross

emission scenario

collecting primary data in Agra and growth rate of different source emissions
were worked out based on limited secondary data available on the regional growth
rates.

o

Data on electricity supply failure (frequency and duration) was not collected
during this study. However, the observations reflected that during failure hours
primarily in the evening peak load period more than 75% of commercial units
were operating DO sets.
For current emissions during 1992 - 93, where ever data was not avaliable field

observations (primary data) were collated to evaluate spatial & temporal variations of emission
activities viz. for vehicle counts-manual roadside observations, for domestic emissions house
to house surveys in different socio-economic categories of population groups.
As regards similar information available on studies carried out in other cities viz.
correlation between the rise in ambient air concentration versus source emission growth, is
concerned - case studies for three Indian urban centres, (report available in three volumes)
for Bombay/ Delhi /Calcutta are attached for general reference. Report on 20 Megacities of
The World (Earthwatch Series) is also available for reference.

