4.2.1

Pbysico-Ch(amical Factors

All lhe building material minerals in general. get affected
by carbon dioxide dissolved in water. Calcite mineral. shows the
IIlaXinlum reactivily unlike the silicate minerals reacling at a lower
rate and also the weathering products are also different. The eod
result. is in terms of decomposition of stones. Weathering due to
SOa prescnt in the almosphere is the major cause of decay of stones.
These react with carbonates forming comparalively rugh soluble
CaSO. (gypsum) crystals which causing blistering, scaling and loss
of cohefiion of the stone surfaces. In rain washed areas gypsum does
Dot accumulate on stone surface due to washing otT process exposing
to the fresh surfaces. In sheltered areas, where the rain docs not
reach gypSU m is likely to remain to form a hard dirty crust. These
sulphate deposits or crust tend to be harmful rather than protective.
It leads to spontaneous blistering and scaling of the swface.
Other common effect is discolorations produced by
effiorescence which are water soluble salts that crystallise on the
surface of the stone due to evaporatio~. During the salt crystallisation
the pressure is exerted against the porewalls causing disruption of
stone in the form of extensive spalling (P-16).
In the case of VM marble the deterioration occurs in two
modes. In rust mode weathering takes place where the marble is
sheltered under domes and cornices and protected from direct impact
of rain. Here a crust is formed which after many years ellfolialcs
due to mechanical stresses. 10 case of marble exposed to rain, gradual
reduction occurs because the reaction products are washed away by
rainfall and fresh marble is exposed to renewed reaction. The crusLq
are formed priularily due to SO. but. the cuoluJative errt.'Ct of all
pollutants shall be more danlaging. It is alRO observed thal lrace
IDelals prescnt in fly ash aDd SPM e.g. MD, fe'e and V acl 09
catalysts for oxidation of SO, and in turu enhance degradalion of
calcite to gypsum.
fc'or estinaalion of danlClge of building Pluteri,,1 of VM, lho
bxlcls fonnuluU!d and validal«!d und(!r controllcacJ Cxpo:-luro C'xl)('rinu'"lH
tfero used for predicting the! Htunc crroH;on tuk ing inll) conHi,Jc'ruliuu)J

