128

or

tho local conditions
pollution levels, climate and physico-chcfnical
characteristics of stones used in VM construction.

4.2.1.1 Damage Estimations lor VM Marble
11le literature available on the models on cause and effect
relationship for a building malcrials (slone) and ambient pollution
exposure conditions is very limited. One \\~cll documented model was
evolved for the physical damage as a dalnage function for a while
marble stone exposed to polluted atmosphere (major pollulants SO
N02 etc.) with varied controlcd conditions of relative humidity by
Haynie. Spence and Upham (1976).

In this model loss-in-weight is a parameter used for assessing
the magnitude of damage caused by Ute pollutants. It is assumed
that water soluble reaction products are constantly removed from
the surface of exposed specimens due to maintenance/cleaning or rain
washout and primarily account for the loss-in- weight. Each loss..
in-weight value ,converted to an equivalent thickness of calcium
carbonate and expressed as an erosion rate-loss in thieknes.c; uniLc;
per year (JLmlyr). The assessment methodology employed in this model
provides a tQoI for obtaining estimates of monthly or even annual
material losses attributable to the meao pollution exposilion.
The erosion rate of marble
at VM) have been evaluated using
et.al taking the mean atmospheric
for the year 1990 for the whole

and stone are (building malcrial
this model developed by Haynie
conditions for 502' N02 and RH
Calcutta cily.

The monthly average of S02 concentrations at Caleu lla
exceeded 80 J,lg/m3 in winter (Od. Dec and Jan). NO z concentrations
were higher in winter as conlpared to the other seasons. I-Iowcver,
monthly mean NO a concenlrations did not exceed 120 J,lg/n1:t nlark.
The average RI-l was higher' than 60% in every monlh throughoul
the year. The maxinlum Ril was 84% in rainy season 3S ob!icrvt!d
Cronl Clilnatologieal tablcs of IMU. 1'hc loss in depth duc to Rurrace
erosion was csliJnatcd betwcen 0.12 to 0.28 JAnllrnonth. "he rale waR
more than 0.2 J.uu/lnontb e~cept for Jan, }4'cb, Mar and Apr. J-I"wcvcr.
the erosion rate per year was obtained a8 2.66 J.un. wi,,!" 8VC r,,"<:
of SOa and NOa concentrations were 48.94 and 39.27 ",,:/11):1 ,.('HIK'clivc·ly.
t

