Subject

Air Pollution StudieD to redefine
tho bounda.ries o~ l.he ~laj Trapezium:
NH.l!;Ur Hopo_£.' t. 0.£ July 1~9:J.

The report cited above seeks to revise tho boundaries of
the Taj Trapezium from the earlier one drawn up by an Expert Group
in -j979. The new boundaries are baaed o,n model projections of
the scenario that mieht develop in £uture. Tho report. considers
only the pollutIon released by the industrial complexes at
Agra, Mathura and Bharatpur. In this context, the following
comments and suSgcDtlons arc ojtpr~rt lor consideration.
2.

Model deficiencies and uncertainties.
The projectiono are based on a Gaussian plume mode]. Computer
programmes i'or this purpose have been imported i'rom abroad.
The models a.ssume the following genera.l expressIon for the
spread of pollution from a sonrce of strength Q ( g/sec )

C (x, !I, a):;;.

(%;'~ IJ20 U) ~p

t 6J -';I°fJzrr."

2. -

(i!;~c..>h"i:-J

(I)

where x o ' Yo are the location coordinates o£ the source, C Is
the concentration a.nd 0;, at are the ,standard deviatIons in
the horizontal a.nd ver-t;ica~ directions. Modii'ications are introduced
to the above seneral expreosion for di££erent source configurations,
that is, for a continuous point, line or area.
The report does not specify the exact expression that was
used for different sources but it is r~leV&lt to point out
the uncertainties tha-t are inherent in the Gaussian plume model.
The ma.in assumptions of the model are: (i) the ma.ss or the
ef.fluent is constant. This can be seen by integra-ting (1).
(ii) the spread or diffusion in orthogonal direc~ions is aosumed
to be independent of each other and (lii) the ntandoxd deviatIons
depend on on a. number of meteoroloelcal facLorD~along with
travel time and -(;he nature of Lhe terraIn. In vIew or thODO
assumptions, it is suggested that snnsitivity tests be conducted
to determine the ranee of model uncertainties.
To illustrate -this let us consider Lhe .rollowin~ example.
The slilort -term lateral spread is o.ften ~i ven by an empirical
expression of the £orm

V; -

oe

O· 01":]

0&

ex)

o 'S-:f

(

:2-)

where
is the s liandard devia-tion of the azimuthal wind. If an
error of 20% , say, is made in determining the standard deviation
2then because equation ("I) contains a term ~ the overall error
in compu-ting the concentration (G) wIll be cOlwiderably more.
Sensitivity tento of this naLure will Improve our confidence in
the model outputs cited in the NNERI r~por·t.

