- 2 -

3.

Uncertainties In wind direction
Uncertain tieD catlsod by fluctuat10no in ,,/illd direction
are to some extent reflected in table ~ of the Suc:unmar:l of the
NEERI Report under conoideration. Hourly \'lind dlrcc Lions were
probably not consIdered £or predicting SOL concentrations
.from the }'irozabad Glass Industries. A ' zero' value :for
winter appears questionable, if it is baaed 011 only two wind
observations per day. There is no mention of a diurnal varia.tion
in wind direction at this station. ~J.1he same table states that
~';'-e ~ ~~}~ Lr'::,... to.. that the pollution ( S02 ) predic tions
for I"lathura wore for Lhe worDt meteorological cOlJdi liiono and
highest stack emissIons. A clarificatIon of \'Iho.l. was lUeell L
by the 'worst meteorological condition) • would be helpful.
The figures in the table suggest that they are short term
oonoentrations for 24 hours. It would be better to
consider long term concen-trations based on a wider data sample.
:;.

AddIj;lon of pollution concentrations from different sources.
Tablo 2 shows the cumulative concentration obtained
by addlng the individaual contributions from dIfferent
sources, i.e., from Agra, Mathura and Bharatpur. This :h:il not
striotly correct, because the pollution from one source may
interact with -the p?llution from another source. It should be
treated as a non lineax problem. Moreover, the wind
direction from all Lhe three sources need not be identical at any
given ·time. There oould be the possibili:jy on e££luen-l.s from
one source interacting with those from another source to
off-set each other.

4.

Inversions
There is a critical value of the strength of an Inversion
In temperature which is modt efl"ective in trappl.ng pollutants.
In general terms, ·Lh~ effective temperature inversiono should
satisfy the rollowine criteria: (1) the la.pse rate of potential
temperature should exceed 0.005 °C/m and (i1) the difference in
potential temperature between the top and the base of
an inversion layer should be greater than 2°C. It is Dot
clear from the NEERI report whether these criteria were
i'ollowed. On page I1-19 an abnorihally high va.lue of the lapse
rate ( 28.6°0 / 100 m) has been cited, but there is no mention
of the depth of this inversion la.yer.
5.
pasquill- Glfford classification
The standard deviations in the azimu-~ha~ and vertical
directions are related to meteorological varlableo by following
a classificatlon due to pasquill and Gifford. But, there o.:1:'e
other classIfications that are aloo in use. In Lhis context,
we may mention tho schomo or Goldor (D.Golder, 1972,
Relations among the stability parameters In the surface layer,

