PREFACE
December 3, 1984, saw the worst industrial disaster occurring in Bhopal. The leakage of
poisonous methyl isocyanate (MIC) gas from the chemical plant of Union Carbide left in its wake
over two thousand dead and countless many maimed and in a state of permanent disrepair. An
industrial disaster of this unprecedented nature required a technical assessment by an expert group
of the highest level of competence. The Government of India requested Dr. S. Varadarajan, the then
Director General of the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, to coordinate scientific and
technological investigations of the disaster. He brought together at Bhopal a team of scientists,
engineers and technologists from CSIR laboratories and other agencies/departments and industrial
enterprises and supervised 'Operation Faith' and subsequent investigations on the causes and consequences of the accident. As a result, today we have a clearer understanding of the causes and cir.cumstances leading to the accident.
Two important conditions circumscribe Operation Faith and the further work by our scientists. First, an event of this magnitude had not occurred before. A solution to the problem was
not within the realm of a single unit or an agency. It was a crisis-management-situation calling
for the interplay of multi-disciplinary and multi-dimensional expertise, at a national level. The
magnitude of the efforts put in by the scientific team under the leadership of Dr. S. Varadarajan
was immense, technically challenging and had to be completed within a short period of time. This
we believe, was done. It was a tribute to Indian Science and scientists. CSIR, naturally, was in the
forefront and received excellent support from all the other collaborating partners.
A special mention could be made here of the detailed documentation and information base
created for future use, under the leadership of Dr. S. Varadarajan.
It is now time to bring together all the scientific and -tec,hnical data and the results of investigations by CSIR laboratories. Hence these two volumes. The Bhopal tragedy has touched the
conscience of every industrialized nation, struggling to maintain nlinimum standards of industrial
safety. India has had several measures brought into force thereafter. It is believed that'the information contained in these volumes will provide some scope to prevent recurrence of a similar disaster.
The responsibility of coordinating the investigations, on the basis of mutual consultation,
was entrusted to a special CSIR Cell for Bhopal Affairs, comprising Dr. L.K. Doraiswamy, NCL,
Dr P K Ray, ITRC, Dr A V Rama Rao, RRL(H), Dr G Thyagarajan, CLRI, and Dr M Sriram of
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. To them we owe a debt of gratitude.
I congratulate Sarvashri C.V. Swaminathan and N.R. Rajagopal, Scientists of CSIR, for having
compiled these volumes and Shri V. Ramachandran for printing them, in record time .

.(,~~~
New Delhi
25.05.1987

(A.P. MITRA)

Director-General

