INTRODUCTION

How CSIR entered the scene
As a consequence of the uncontrolled release of toxic gas from the pesticide plant of Union Qarbide, Bhopal, on the night of 2/3 December 1984, over a hundred people died and several thousands
were injured within 24 hours of the leak, besides visible damage to the environment and immobilization of public life. There was utter confusion, chaos, and a sense of despair and disbelief everywhere. The Government of Madhya Pradesh was in urgent need of technical guidance regarding
quality of air and water for preventing further panic among the people of Bhopal. They had to cope
with medical relief for over twenty thousand people.

Dr. S. Varadarajan, the then Director General of CSIR and Secretary, DSm had scheduled a
visit to RRL, Bhopal on 5 December 1984. This came to the knowledge of the then Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shri Arjun Singh who had approached RRL, Bhopal for assistance. He was
informed by the then Director of RRL that Dr. Varadarajan would be able to provide the required
guidance.
Shri C.R. Krishnaswamy Rao Sahib, the then Cabinet Secretary requested Dr. Varadarajan
to coordinate all scientific efforts at Bhopal in the wake of the gas leakage. Visualizing the need for
multidisciplinary expertise, Dr. Varadarajan asked team of scientists and technologists with expertise in environmental protection and toxicology to proceed forthwith and assembled at RRL,
Bhopal.
While these teams began an assessment of environmental damage and safety of air and water,
the Director General, CSIR, on a visit to the accident site, was treated to a shocking revelation by
the uec management that bulk quantities of MIC were stored not only in the ill-fated tank E-610
but also in E-611. The frightening implications of the disclosure suddenly loomed large before the
CSIR Chief. There was no time to lose; every available expert in and outside CSIR needed to be
mobilized on a war footing. The CSIR involvement which at first appeared to be for a short time
was extended as a deep and long term proposition.
The formidable and frightening task
With several hundred people dead, more dying and several thousands lying injured and requiring
the correct medical treatment, and the air and water quality being suspect, the already exasperated Madhya Pradesh Government was told, to their utter dismay, that the Union Carbide's revelation of the presence of more MIC (approximately 15 tonnes according to Ve) lying in tank E-611,
posed a new danger that had equal devastating potential as the first one. The M.P. Chief Minister
sought and secured the consent of Dr. Varadarajan to coordinate and manage the crisis.
The tasks before the CSIR scientists were:
Assuring safety of the environment. Teams of scientists analyzed air and water samples
and on the evening of 5th December assured the State Government that there was no
more MIC in the environment and that the air was free from any cyanide. This information was broadcast to the public.

I

