Dealing with MIC in tank 611. The Union Carbide management stated that the material
in tank 611 and the ruptured tank 610 both came from the same batch of MIC produced during October 1984 and that part of the material had been transferred from
610 to 611. With a common manifold of pipelines and headers, this essentially implied
that the co~ditions and causes which led to the toxic gas discharge from tank 610
were also obtained in 611. In other words, a second Bhopal tragedy was not to be ruled
out. Regrettably the UC management was not aware of this new hazard and had no
knowledge of the precautions to be observed, should tank 611 leak. They were unable
to provide an acceptable procedure for determining the purity of MIC in tank 611,
though it was known to them that MIC was vulnerable to explosive polymerisation
in the presence of certain impurities and also when thoroughly pure. A reliable procedure had to be developed, and developed fast, before determining how to handle
the content of tank 611.
It was necessary to analyze the circumstances that led to the toxic gas leak on 2/3 December.
All possible avenues of ingress of foreign materials had to be identified and appropriate precautionary measures introduced (to prevent it).
A leakage from tank 611 could not be ruled out. A perplexing question was: if a leakage did
occur., how to handle it, how to minimize damage to people and the environment. With the news
of the chemical industry's worst ever disaster spreading around the world, Bhopal was teeming the
media men, voluntary action groups, lawyers and interested parties from all over the world, apart
from the necessary presence of representatives of government agencies, medical experts and service
personnel.

More important and urgent than all these, a way had to be found out of a set of limited
options for quality and safely disposing off MIC in tank 611.
The CSIR Chief and his team of scientists had, on their hands, a formidable, frightening and
unenvible task.

How the crisis was managed
A crisis management team under the direction of the CSIR Chief came into being and it initiated
several simultaneous actions. P. . ominent among these were:

Experts from CSIR, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the Indian Petrochemicals Corporatio.n Ltd. (IPCL), the Department of Environment (DO En), Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, (HOC) the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) and the University Department of Chemical Technology, Bombay
conferred and analysed the likely causes of the 2/3 December gas leak. This was a
prerecruisite for devising means for preventing a similar leakage.
The pros and cons of four alternative options for disposal of MIC in tank 611 were
evaluated by a team of experts. A major limitation was that any method selected had
to be compatible with the facilities and experience available at the plant site since
the plant belonged to Union Carbide and its personnel were to handle the physical
operations. Once the choice of method of disposal was made, the required quantities
of raw materials and chemicals had to be organised in the shortest possible time. A
programme for organisation and monitoring of the plant operation was drawn up.
The Director General, CSIR was personally in charge of its overall monitoring, while
liaising and coordinating with other agencies which were provided the needed sup..
port.

2

