Information and guidance was provided to the State Government on the precautions
to be taken for minimising damage, including evacuation of people to safer places.
Guidance was provided to the State Government on precautions to be observed by the
public (such as keeping water and wet towels closeby) in the event of any gas leakage,
and how to act if a leak did occur.
With rumours abounding and anxiety everywhere, authentic information was regularly
provided to the press and the public through government channels and regular meetings
with the press.
A close and constant vigil was kept of Tank 611 for any rise in temperature or pressure. All instrumentation and control systems in the relevant plant areas were checked
and defective instruments replaced.
A crack team of scientists was assembled and specific responsibilities assigned in the
overall task of safe disposal of contents of tank 611. They operated round the clock,
in shifts.

The crisis was successfully and efficiently managed. The processing operations (Operation Faith) were started on the morning of 16th December and completed on 22
December 1984. A total of 21 tonnes of MIC (as against 15 tonnes estimated by the
Union Carbide) in tank 611, one tonne from tank 619 and material from a number of
stainless steel drums were reacted in one tonne batch lots at the rate of 3-4 tonnes
each day. Union Carbide's Bhopal plant was relieved of all MIC and there was satisfaction everywhere.
Interfacing with other agencies and organisations
Right from the time CSIR took over the responsibility of activities in the Bhopal plant on 5 December 1984, virtually every organisation, private or public, which was in a position to support and
assist the endeavours was consulted and associated. The Indian Council of Medical Research, the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, the Defence Research and Development Organisation,
the Department of Science & Technology, the Department of Environment, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, the Directorate General of Technical Development, Hindustan Organic Chemicals
Ltd., Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Central Water and Air Pollution Control Board,
Indian Meterology Department, Bombay University Department of Chemical Technology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Safdarjung Hospital and the Academy of Young Scientists were prominently involved in the follow-up action at Bhopal after the
gas leakage. The nature of involvement ranged from consultation or expert advice to actual participation at the site, conducting experimental investigations and providing medical assistance and
material support.
During the planning and implementation of Operation Faith close interaction was maintained with Union Carbide, the relevant departments of Madhya Pradesh Government, Cabinet Secretariat, Ministries of Home Affairs, Health & Family Welfare, Law and External Affairs, Air Force,
Army, Navy and Border Security Force and the media. The cooperation extended by these organisations enabled efficient and successful implementation of the task undertaken by CSIR.
Scientific studies on the factors related to Bhopal toxic gas leakage
Although the crisis was successfully managed there remained a good deal of follow-up work. It
was necessary to carry out a scientific study of the chemical nature and reactions of MIC, features
3

