of the facilities and control for its manufacture, storage, utilization and disposal. Equally important
W88 a thorough examination of the buried tank (610) and its chemical contents, as that alone would
provide the basis for outlining the factors and circumstances which led to the violent chemical
reaction and rapid leakage of toxic gas; in other words - reconstruction of the event. It was thus a
two-pronged approach: simulating in the laboratory as closely as possible the chemical reactions
that occurred in tank 610, and analysis of the residue thereof.
A report, "Report on scientific studies on the factors to the Bhopal toxic gas leakages", containing the results of the above work carried out under the direction of Dr. Varadarajan was submitted to both the Houses of the Parliament on 20 December 1985. A copy of the report is included in the volume.

Suing UCC: Technical inputs to the Indian case

Early in 1985 the Government of India decided to sue the Union Carbide Corporation of USA
for damages, costs and appropriate relief. The case being technically-intensive, CSIR has been
providing assistance to the Government of India on most technical spects. Mention may be made
of:
Association of DG's nominee in the team sent to USA headed by the Law Secretary
to select a competent American Law Firm from the panel shortlisted by the Attorney
General of India (March 1985).
Extensive discussions with Robins, Zelle, Larsen and Kaplan (RZLK) (the Law Firm
selected) on the technical aspects of the case. In several rounds of discussions detailed presentations were made of MIC gas leak, the chemistry, the design aspects of
the plant etc. The counts on which uec was culpable were suggested to the Attorneys.
They were suitably incorporated in the 'Complaint' of Union of India VB Union Carbide Corporation before the United States District Court, Southern District of New
York.
Active conferences and discussions with RZLK in regard to the technical points in the
series of developments which followed, such as uec' response to the complaint, Union
of India's interrogations and requests for admission, answers and objections to Defendant's interrogations and such other legal documents.
Public relations visits to meet eminent scientists in USA (to apprise them of the chemical and technological realities of tile Bhopal tragedy)
Assistance to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (as and when required)
on technical aspects of the case.
The above functions were performed by G. Thyagarajan on behalf of eSIR.
It would be reasonable to say that CSIR has helped substantially in establishing the culpability of UCC on technical counts.

Dr. R.A. Mashelkar of NCL, Pune acted as Assessor to the BhopalJnquiry Commission and
NCL provided technical servioos as and when needed by the Commission.

4

