SPECIAL REPORT

Indian city begins to heal but conflicts remain

Wit Lepkowski, C&EN Washington

Bhopal one year later and the images stream back. The
storage tank of methyl isocyanate (MIC)-41 metric
tons of it-cooking within from reactions with contaminants. Molecules polymerizing, heat rising beyond
100, then 200 °C. The contents boiling to such frenzy
that the tank's concrete casing shakes and cracks. Gases
and liquids bursting through a rupture disk and relief
valve, then surging through vent lines toward their
final release through an overwhelmed scrubber.
Worker panic in the plant, a sleeping community
outside as the gas begins to spread. Bodies roused,
coughing, crying out, eyes burning and watering.
Thousands running, staggering through the dusty
streets and alleys, many clutching their babies, not
knowing where to run to escape. Unconsciousness,
injury, and death by the thousands. Pandemonium in
the hospitals. By daybreak, the scene of silence around
those left behind: fathers, mothers, children; cows,
bulls, goats, dogs, all in final repose. A peace in its
eeriness never more heart wrenching. The bodies disposed of by cremation and mass burials.
Then the local, national. . and international responses.
Medical supplies flown in. A planeload from the U.S.
ordered back by Indian officials already thinking of
compensation battles ahead. The sudden incarceration
of Union Carbide officers who arrive to offer help.
The dispute over the presence of cyanide in the gases.
The invasion of U.S. lawyers. The overwhelming outpouring of local help. Schoolchildren, boy and girl
scouts, bankers, merchants, the elderly-all transformed
to paramedics and performing heroically. The visits
by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Mother Theresa.
December 2. 1985 C&EN

The tense, circuslike atmosphere of Dec. 16-"Operation Faith" day-when the remaining MIC in an adjoining tank is converted to its final insecticide product, Sevin. The nine--month investigation by India's
Central Bureau of Investigation. The now-suspended
criminal investigation by a state commission.
Today, Bhopal is a hotbed of unrest, reform, and
rebuilding as it struggles toward a future. Mass demonstrations and memorial events are scheduled this
month in commemoration of the first anniversary of
the disaster. A repentant Union Carbide India Ltd.
has prepared a press kit outlining its program of
various relief measures. The Poison Gas Struggle Front
(known by the Hindi word "morcha"), an infuriating goad! to the local establishment, is staging a
mass march demanding that Carbide be punished
and ejected from India. The government of Madhya
Pradesh-the state of which Bhopal is the capitalhas scheduled a symposium with an international cast
of writers and artists commissioned to deliver eulogies. Over the past year documentaries have been
prepared, poems written, plays performed, paintings
shown. Poster shows on the misuse of technology
have been circulated to science classes in schools
throughout the state. In New Delhi an international
symposium is being held that will announce to a
world kept in the dark thus far the results of Indian
investigations of the tragedy'S medical effects.
Memorials, too, are being planned. One will be a
research center designed along the program lines of
the center in Hiroshima, which for 40 years has been
following the condition of the atomic bomb victims
and their progeny. Another will be attached to a
Madhya Pradesh Institute of Disaster Management,

7

