•
unable to work. Mental illness as a result of the accident is one of the most serious health problems.
The official government death toll is around 1800.
Doctors are willing tD concede that another 500
to 1000 could have died unaccounted for during
the first 24 hours. Official state government figures
say 320,000 persons out of Bhopal's total population of about 1 million were affected in some way,
about 14,000 "seriously." About $2.3 million has
been spent on cash payments to families who lost
members in the tragedy.
.
It is difficult, however, to measure what level of
help the city needs. Officials tick off assistance figurescash payments to families with fatalities, numbers
treated for lung fibrosis, estimates of stillbirths, pounds
of rice and wheat distributed, rupees handed out, the
20,000 x-rays and 35,000 clinical tests performed at
Hamidia Hospital, the 1775 beds available now to gas
victims.

But the numbers mean little against the magnitude
of the disaster, still incomprehensible today. In any of
the 30 urban wards, chats with people that were affected by the gas always reveal some unmet need.
I~ese days, everyone is a gas victim," quips one
government official. As Bhopal's current mayor
Deepchand Yavad indicates, one may as well assume
everyone in Bhopal was gassed. But that's a politician
talking. Bhopal's pistonlike vitality makes one qUe&-:
tion claims of any urban malaise there.
MediCal care, especially for lung, eye, and intestinal
damage, is readily available. Every day hundreds line
up at volunteer clinics, mobile treatment centers, or
government outpatient facilities around the city. But
an issue of high controversy is the extent to which
affected persons are being actively sought. Local medical officials say that 34,000 persons have been visited
by doctors inquiring about any problems. Records are
being kept on everyone being treated. But to critics
that isn't enough. Too many victims, they believe, are
being ignored.
So there are stories in Bhopal today, and stories
within stories-about the cause of the disaster, the
dazzling pastiche of short- and long-term health effects, the relief measures, the controversy over the
presence of cyanide in victims' bodies, the behavior of
Carbide during the early hours of the disaster, the
tangled legal story, the state of morality and legality
in a culture as contradictory as India's.

1be C81Be: its engineering, its imp6cations
After a year little is known for certain about what
caused the runaway reaction in tank 610 at the Bhopal
plant. What is well known, of course, is that the MIC
stored in it underwent a hydrolysis reaction that, in
tum, triggered a series of heat-generating polymerizations, additions, and degradations.
The resulting pressure burst the tank's rupture disk,
blasted tNough the pressure valve just above it, and
l

10

the gases surged about 600 feet along the 8-inch relief
vent line, past various branch lines, and into the
scrubber. They overwhelmed the scrubber's capacity
(it was designed only to handle process vent gases,
not runaway reactions from storage) and the gases
escaped unneutralized.
The flare tower, also designed only for process vent
products and moderate flows from the storage area,
was shut down for repair. Since the plant was not
producing MIC or ?nything else that night, it made
little sense to operating personnel to keep the flare
burning. Moreover, a system of pressurized sprinklers
that would have formed a water curtain" over the
escaping gases was itself deficient. Water pressure
turned out to be too low to reach the height of the
escaping gas.
Essentially three theories prevail to explain how it
happened. One is sabotage (or mischief) by the insertion of water or contaminants into one of the lines
leading into the tank. Carbide says its studies indicate
that up to 240 gal of water could have entered this
way. No other explanation but one of deliberate intent makes sense, the company says. The vast majority
'of Indians scorn the sabotage theory.
A second theory involves the IImissing slip blind,"
whereby a worker, ordered to wash out a series of
2-inch pressure-safety valve lines near the MIC production unit, forgot to insert a disk meant to prevent
water from rising up into the main vent line, called
the relief vent header. The water, the theory goes,
flowed up the line toward the MIC storage area, passed
into a jumper line connected to a process vent line
that led directly into the tank. This is the theory that
labor, environmental, and popular activists embrace
because its source is workers who claim to know what
happened.
The third theory is inadvertent contamination by
combinations of rust, metallic ions, chloride ion, as
little as a "cupful" of water, because of lax monitoring,
sloppy maintenance, and inferior technology. Indian
scientists doing their investigation tend toward this
view and, believing it, are warning the U.S. that until
Carbide itself fully understands what happened, it
could happen again wherever MIC is stored.
As the UCIL production superintendent, S. P.
Choudhary, told C&EN during a tour of the Bhopal
plant last month, "We just didn't know that MIC
could be that reactive." Choudhary, one of the UCIL
management group facing criminal prosecution by
the Madhya Pradesh government, rules out all theories that would account for process contamination of
lines leading to tank 610. "We do not believe that a
small amount of water would have caused this runaway chemical reaction," UeIL says in a statement.
Jackson B. Browning, the parent company's vice
president for health, safety, and environmental affairs, adds that the small amount of heat generated by
such a small input of water would have been absorbed
by the bulk of the contents.
II

December 2. 1985 C&EN

