One particular sabotage theory, advanced by Carbide during Congressional hearings after the disaster,
also has been ruled out by Choudhary. According to
that scheme, the llsaboteur" was supposed to have
attached a water hose at the source of the nitrogen
line that led to the tank and simply let the water run.
That scenario has several holes. For one, the source of
nitrogen was at least half a mile away from the tank,
in an area owned by the company that supplied nitrogen to the Carbide plant. The pressure needed to
reach the MIC tank, which itself was under positive
pressure, however slight, would have been too great.
More telling, though, is that investigations showed
no trace of water in the nitrogen line after the accident.
The slip blind theory is also illogical, he says. The
reason is that a valve a few inches up from where the
slip blind was to have been placed was, records show,
closed. Even if the valve leaked, he says, it is improbable that even small amounts of water would have
risen about 12 feet to a line that widened to a diameter of 8 inches and then continued some 600 feet to a
storage tank that not only was under pressure but, by
that route, closed to entry of anything (both the pre&. sure valve and rupture disk were closed tight).
But there was another way not mentioned by
Chaudhary, via -that jumper line between the relief
valve line and process vent line. This line, open or
shut by valves-how many isn't clear-led directly to
the tank. Everyone who has studied the accident agrees
this could be a port of contaminant entry. Contaminants might have passed along the relief valve line,
across the jumper line, into the process vent line, and
into the tank. The scenario assumes a lot of valves that
were not just leaky but open. A third option was the
nitrogen line at the area of entry into the tank. A
fourth involves lines that carried MIC out to a refrigeration unit and back into the tank.
So Choudhary says there is only one option left:
IISomeone deliberately did it. There are lots of places
in any plant where with a simple tool you can detach.
a linkage and add a contaminant." And a source of
water existed a few feet away from the tank. But one
needs a motive. Carbide hasnlt really supplied the
motive, except for newspaper accounts of a radical
Sikh group that claimed credit for the disaster. The
problem is that the existence of such a group is yet to
be verified nationally.
The view of Indian scientists involved in the government's investigation of the accident is that the
answer lies in contamination from corrosion. They
believe the accident was just that-an accident-but
that it was avoidable, and that the fault lay with the
parent company, Union Carbide Corp.
"We have proof," says an Indian close to the investigation, "that the process know-how and design provided by Carbide were defective. Any other company
in India purchasing foreign technology would have
raised questions of why large quantities of stored MIC
were necessary. UCIL could have asked something
like that. But in this case, here is a plant owned by
December 2. 1985 C&EN

Carbide. The detailed design was Carbide's. Approval
and acceptance of the mechanics and prpcessing were
done by Carbide before commissioning."
He goes on to itemize where the Bhopal plant design was deficient. At the Institute plant, for example, there is an intermediate storage tank between the
production and storage units. This is used for continuous sampling of the product. Second, the MIC storage
tank in Bhopal was not equipped with safety instrumentation. Sound alarms and flashing lights go off if
the pressure and temperature increase at Institute.
There was no such warning system at the storage tank
area in Bhopal. In addition, the chilling 'System was
underdesigned. At the Institute plant, the storage tank
itself has refrigeration coils. The Freon is circulated
inside the tank. At Bhopal, the material was taken out
and then returned. So the UOL refrigeration system
was underdesigned; the cooled MIC went right back
into the tank, which was probably at ambient temperature most of the time. So it probably was never being
chilled, even when the unit was on. I don't think the
tank could have been cooled much below 15°C."
Indian government laboratories are attempting to
simulate the reactions that might have taken place,
based on their own samplings of residues as their own
check on Carbide's investigation. ~We have taken samples of the tank's wall," says one source. "It's almost
impossible to go in the tank now because it still
contains highly lachrymating mixtures-himel'S, dimers, isocyanates, dimethylurea, biuret."
S. Varadarajan, India's top scientist as director-general
of the Indian Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, says he is worned about the safety of those
working or living in the vicinity of MIC in the U.S.
today. I~ think that until the exact cause of the runaway reaction at Bhopal is explained," he says, uthere
should be a ban on shipments."
II

1be medical results
One year after the disaster, Bhopal is one vast experimental ground of industrial toxicology. Every patient is in some sense a toxicolOgical celebrity.
Figures on the total number who died are becoming
less controversial by the month. Some activists are
still holding out for a figure of up to 10,000, but their
voices have quieted. Their claim has been that thousands of bodies were dumped by Army trucks anonymously in mass graves at sites some distance from the
city. But no one has located any such graves and few
families have come forward to register family losses
beyond those reported months ago. So the term u more
than 200.0" is the best anyone can say. As it is, about
15 gas-exposed persons currently die every month in
Bhopal, according to official state estimates. The figure is over and above the 250 or so normal monthly
deaths in the colonies that were affected.
Medical studies are showing a bewildering array of
physical and psycholOgical problems among the affected. Children under 10, when asked to make drawings, inevitably put their crayons to aude depictions

II

