of Carbide, gas, and death. Strange sores, susceptibility to tuberculosis, persistently lowered oxygen transport are some of the complications rendered by exposure to the gases.
Some patients are classic cases, such as Dropdi Bai, a
55-year-old woman who has been hospitalized with
pulmonary problems ever since the first night. 8ai is
special, because she is one of the few gas victims of
Bhopal who has been .under surVeillance ever since
the leak. She is likely to remain in the MIC ward of
Hamidia Hospital for a long time. K. S. Gaur, the
physician who administers the ward, says her major
pathology is bronchiotitis obliterans-blockage of her
lungs air passages. She is being given cortisone to
reduce inflammations. She arrived at the hospital in a
coma and showed signs of cyanosis. Sodium thiosulfate, the standard antidote to cyanide exposure, was
tried twice on her, Gaur says, but with no relief.
Most of the research and treatment in the ward, he
says, involves, the effect of MIC on the lungs and on
lung function. Other studies include the psychiatric
aspects, gastrointestinal complications (varied and common), and the long-term complications of drugs such
as cortisone, sodium thiosulfate, and Levamisol. IIMany
symptoms," he says, /lean be explained by immunological disturbances."
The Indian agency in charge of continuing biomedical research on the Bhopal tragedy is the Indian
~ Council on Medical Research, headed by V. Ramalingaswami. Located in New Delhi, ICMR has spent
$2 million in research so far involving about 150
researchers. And gradually Ramalingaswami hopes
most of the followup research and continuous
monitoring will be done in Bhopal itself.
The most serious overt problems researchers are
investigating involve the lungs, he says. IIWhereas
eye effects appear to be abating, lung problems are
persisting. We're looking at the nature of the disturbances induced by MIC. For those who received moderate to high exposure of the gas, lung edema developed rapidly, and scarring of the alveoli is common.
These changes also have made the patients susceptible to pneumonia.
IIExtensive studies have shown," Ramalingaswami
adds, Uthat patientS have an obstructed as well as
restrictive element . " That is, they not only absorb less
oxygen but breathe in less as well. The restrictive
aspect could be due to muscle spasms that constrict
and narrow the lumen.
ULung damage is the most serious and most important of our efforts," he says. Bronchodilator drugs are
the most common treatment, but if the causes of the
lung problems are getting increasingly subtle, other
forms of therapy may be needed, he says. Breathing
therapy, for example, is just being started. And it
~ ~ut that instruction in yoga breathing techniques 18 the form of physiotherapy chosen. Researchers are saying there is no known technique more
effective for expanding lung capacity.

12

Results of research on Bhopal victims
by India's industrial toxicology center
Tota I studied:
508 males, 601 females
Age groups:
50%-10 to 35 years
17%-36 to 45 years
16 %-under 15 years
9%--46 to 55 years
8%-over 56 years
Average monthly income:
300 rupees ($25)
Distance from factory:
61 % less than 2 km

31% 2to4km
Chest x-rays performed:
903, of which 739 were
normal, 164 abnormal
91 suggested definite pathology
48 showed changes attributed to MIC
Biochemical studies:
Glutathione level reduced

In

30 % t

indicating
hampering of detoxification mechanism and
impairment of redox

potential of biological

system
Immunological studies:
55" showed Iowaphagocytic ability
Chromosomal studies:
31" showed cfy~

somal aberrations
Lung function tests:
39" showed ventilatory
Impairment
Behavioral/psychological
studies:
Difficulty In concentration was most cornmon complaint. Also

confusion, poor memory, headache, Irritabillty, depression

The immunological aspect also could be involved in
explaining some of the more subtle, restrictive aspects
of the lung damage, he adds. One study involving
Indian scientists and Meryl Karol, an immunotoxicologist from the University of Pittsburgh, turned up
detection of circulating antibodies after animal exposure to MIC-now called the MIC-specific IGE antibody. IIIf one detects it in the patients, the finding
could lead us to believe the obstructive element could
be the consequence of this immunological change."
About 3000 pregnant women were exposed to the
gases, according to Ramalingaswami, and miscaniages
and stillbirths were frequent. In the first 20 weeks,
436 spontaneous abortions occurred out of 2600 pregnancies. The normal rate in Bhopal is 6 to 10%. ""Malformations are still being, studied, although doctors
are not noticing any increase of obvious -birth defects," he says. "'The genetic and cancer aspects of the
gasing are the biggest unkowns and will have to be
followed for years."
Heart surgeon R. K. Bisarya, the Bhopal mayor at
the time of the tragedy and now back in full-time
medical practice, takes a dour view of the medical
situation in the city.
"'Long-term effects are showing up now," he says.
I IAnd they are much worse
than I expected. I am
happy about the condition of eyes, however. I thought
we'd have thousands of people needing corneal transplants. I'm glad to see that few do. But the long-range
ef~ects are bad. People's vitality is continuing to declIne. Many feel they are not going to survive. There
is lots of colitis, diarrhea, ulcers. A lot of female

December 2. 1985 C&EN

