disorders. Lots of women delivered prematurely,
though the fetuses were usually normal."
Bisarya thinks the state me~ical establis~ment made
a serious mistake by not taklng systematic records of
the affected people from the very beginning. The
focus was too much on treatment and not enough on
the careful recording of symptoms.
l'Also, I would have expected more involvement
from American scientists and physicians," he adds.
uSeveral people I know from Los Angeles said they
were willing to come and spend a year or two. They
needed government grants to do that. But the U.S.
provided no such help.
ULegally, it would have been beneficial to have
American scientists. If the case goes to court and our
Indian scientists make a claim, Carbide will send i~
American scientists to rebut them. If we had Amensays. "At that time there was a lot of pressure on the
medical community. Whatever supplies we gave were
not acknowledged in writing. Then came the co~tro­
versy over cyanide. That led some pe~ple to belIev.e
that UCIl deliberately misled the medIcal communIty. I don't know what OUI doct~rs were.telling ~eople.
But the accusation that VCIL wIthheld InformatIon on
long-term effects does not make sense. The truth is
that we were unable to communicate to them what
they needed to know."
.
Volunteer health organizations are upset with th.e
government because they feel Madhya Pradesh phYSIcians continue to underplay the extent of damage to
women. Rani Bang, a Bombay-based gynecologist,
reported in March that of 55 studies of women, 94%
developed gynecological diseases like leucorrhea, 79%
pelvic inflammatory diseases, and 46% menstrual bleeding. IlLactation suppression, impotence in husbands,
stillbirths, and abortions have been other effects," her
report stated.
.
Says Anil Sadgopal, leader of the Bhopal POlson Gas
Struggle Front: UWe were unwilling from the very
beginning to accept the ways government doctors
were downplaying the extent of problems. On Dec. 27
Ishwar Oass, then health secretary, was declaring that
only eyes and lungs were affected. Th~ ~est ?f the
systems he said were normal. To us activIsts In the
field, working with the injured, the statement was
shocking. Our survey teams had established that almost every organ of the body was showing one or
another affliction. Gynecological disorders in various
forms were observed by our doctors. And they are
still showing it now.".
.
.
But although medical dIsputes contl~ue, espe~lall.y
over cyanide toxicity, much of that stndent ?~rIod IS
past. N. R. Bhandari, superintendent of Hanudla. Hospital, says women need reassurance as much ~s anything. He believes that pUblicity has been so Intense
around dangers to newborns that anxiety is com~on
among pregnant women. Ultrasonic fetal monlto~
have helped calm some women. "When they see their
living baby on the screen, they feel reassured," he
says.
December 2. 1985 C&EN

'The relief efforts
Much of the agitation that has roiled Bhopal over
the past year-riots, police beatings, storming of the
state government's offices, a takeover by the morcha
of the Carbide factory grounds-was in response to
the slowness with which the Madhya Pradesh gov·
ernment was responding to the needs of the victims
and to Carbide's unemployed. workers. A superficial
look at the gas-affected area, however, leads a visitor
to conclude that significant changes are taking place.
Uniformed children sit attentively in one-room
shacks that serve as schools. Little assistance centers
dot the colony, one prOViding counseling services for
women# another dispensing hig!'-protein bread. Small
shops are opening with money either given by the
government or loaned to the villagers by, yes, VCIL.
Some new homes, built solidly of stone, are seen,
contrasting sharply with the crude tin and burlap
shacks that still predominate. In one sense, the gasaffected people are the new elite of Bhopal. Some ~f
those who never had it so bad now have never had It
so good and are the object of envy by the rest of
Bhopal's poor.
Down Berasia Road, which divides the colony from
the UCIL plant, the government has opened cottage
industry training centers. In one, more than 100 women, many widowed, work at sewing machines, turning out garments that the state will distribute in the
remote Villages of Madhya Pradesh. A knitting operation was opened in October. Last month a hOSiery
production unit got started. Men are being trained in
new work, including television repair.
Dass, the Madhya Pradesh first secretary in charge
of all relief operat1ons, says the government has plans
to build an export-oriented business that will prod~ce
fine products for the international market. 1?ass 15 a
Ph.D.-holding organic chemist who long SInce has
abandoned the lab for government service.
A person like him was needed, for through May,
the situation was getting wildly out of hand in Bhopal.
A drought was threatening the area's economy. Its
chief minister, Arjun Singh, had left suddenly to take
up duties as governor of Punjab. Be~ause of the lac~ of
leadership, relief measures were In chaos. MedIcal
treatment and record keeping was a mess. The gasaffected people, led by the morcha. were demanding
more medical, nutritional, financial, and community
help. And the UCIL workers were getting restive by
prospects of no work. May and June were marked by
demonstrations and jailings of morcha and labor leaders, as the cyanide controversy began bursting into
the headlines.
By May, the central government began intervening.
The chief finance minister, V. P. Singh, the most
powerful general policy figure.in the Gandhi go~ern­
ment, visited Bhopal and promised to break the financial logjam. At the same time, the state's new chief
minister, Motalil Vora, began paying surprise visits to
the affected colonies, meeting with people to hear
their grievances.

13

