Says Dass: "The morcha was dissatisfied with the
way the scientific bureaucracy failed to convey information on anything important to the people. A motley crowd led by leftists came together and took a
confrontational position.
"June 25 was the watershed. Since then they haven't
been able to consolidate. When I took charge, I felt
that once the people see what we are trying to do, the
agitational scene will lose its relevance. Such organizations do have a role to play. I told the demonstrators to try to take over the wards and take up some
concrete activities like comprehe~sive care."
Carbide is attempting to inject a permanent presence in Bhopal's rehabilitation efforts, and Dass says
its efforts are always welcome. It is funneling some
money in by anonymous means and has established a
trust fund of about $200,000, made up of contributions from Carbide's Indian and U.S . employees, to be
used as a source of loans to survivors who want to
start businesses. Clinics funded by UCIL are in operation. A leather products business has been started,
funded by UeIL. The most ambitious project is a
housing project that is currently going up.
The future of the plant site is still being determined. Carbide offered to make batteries there, or
reopen the pesticide formulation plant. But the government would have none of that. Carbide has a
99-year lease on the site for industrial operations at a
yearly rental of $600 a year. It has no intention of
giving up the land and probably will appeal any
order to depart.
"We have all our buildings and plant on the site,"
says VeIL's Gokhale. "There is a sizable investment
there." The future of the pesticide research lab on a
hill overlooking Bhopal is also unclear. Morale is poor
there. Several researchers have departed. The government has suspen"ded its tax-exempt status. It could be
nationalized, or closed.
Not everyone is satisfied with the relief schemes in
Bhopal. Sadgopal's morcha continues to agitate for
more input for the affected people. The Rashtriya
Abhiyan Samiti, another of at least a dozen public
interest groups that have settled in Bhopal since the
disaster, is one of Dass' sharpest critics. The group
calls Dass' rehabilitation scheme a "cruel joke" on the
victims.
"Only the government and its experts can explain
how an aerodrome, a railway station, a botanical garden, a boating facility, and a swimming pool are
related to the rehabilitation of gas victims," it says in
a statement. "The government has proposed an expenditure of [$85 million] on such irrelevant schemes.
There has been no attempt to satisfy the needs of the
80% worker population of the gas-affected areas
employed as railway coolies, day laborers, bidi (cigarette) makers, tailors, petty businessmen, textile and
paper mill workers, railway gangmen and peons, whose
health, hOUSing, and employment have been seriously
affected."

14

J.

P. Nagar is the showcase of the affected communities. But at other areas such as Kazi Camp and
Railway Colony, off the official Bhopal gas tour, the
pace of recovery seems slower, though government
clinics and those run by various voluntary groups
keep open house in all the colonies.. At the Railway
Colony, stories tell of residents there being forced to
pay for their own treatment and care, including trips
to Bombay for special care.
The relief story in Bhopal will be a source of continuing controversy for perhaps years.

1biosulfate/cyanide issue is most controversial
The issue over whether many of the Bhopal victims
were and still are exposed to some form of cyanide
poisoning is the most £ontroversial aspect of the tragedy, and the most politically explOSive. Indeed, as one
Gandhi Medical College physician observes, ''The cyanide issue is more sociopolitical than scientific." In
the beginning, Madhya Pradesh medical officials and
Carbide physicians denied any possibility of cyanide
exposure among the gas-affected victims. Yet, on Dec.
6, three days after the event, scientists of India's Air
Pollution Control Board were detecting cyanide at the
MIC storage tank area and 50 meterS downwind . At
about the same time, doctors at Bhopal's hospitals
were treating victims for cyanide exposure. (The presence of cyanide at the tank site is an intriguing notion, since the leakage was almost exclUSively reported
to be at the scrubber.)
By February, the Indian Council of Medical Research finished its study of cyanide exposure and in a
March report recommended continued sodium thiosulfate treatment. It said that, although there. was no
longer any direct exposure to cyanide, reactions involving the body's "cyanogen pool" and biochemical
by-products of MIC could be accounting for the success of sodium thiosulfate treatment.
The report pointed to improved condition of treated
patients and increased urinary concentrations of sodium thiocyanate after treatment, indicating the presence of cyanide in the system. Since sodium thiosulfate is a drug without appreciable side effects, the
council said it would do no harm to continue treatment. Volunteer physicians were reporting permanent recovery in many cases from the treatment. But
local doctors were by then opposing it, claiming that
any positive results were due to psychosomatic responses. Patients, they said and say now, kept coming
back for booster shots that really were doing no good.
"1 feel that in the initial stages there was no doubt
cyanide was present," says health services directol
Nagoo. ~'The toxin that was fixed to the tissues could
well have been cyanide. But a year later it is difficult
to believe cyanide is present and could be detoxified."
The issue has taken on fierce political and socia]
overtones in Bhopal, causing riots, beatings, and jailing
of both morcha demonstrators and volunteer physi·
cians. At one point last summer, police under orden

December 2.1985 C&EN

