clinically, too. It is a well-known treatment for sickle
cell anemia, because the reaction converts the sickled
hemoglobin to a more normal shape.)
A paper just submitted to the Journal of Chemical
Education by organic chemist Harold Teague of
Pembroke State University theorizes a series of reactions by which the MIC-hemoglobin combination could
result in the generation of hydrogen cyanide. The
reactions involve adenosine triphosphate and a series
of electron shifts, resulting in the splitting off of
hydrogen cyanide, which would then itself bind to
hemoglobin. The success of thiosulfate therapy would
then make some sense.
So SCientifically, the cyanide issue is intriguing;
poli tically it raises adrenaline levels; and legally it
waits a final verdict as to its importance. Right now, it
is no consideration in the current legal battle between
Carbide and the government of India.

Chemical safety refonn in Madhya Pradesh
If words alone are the criterion, Madhya Pradesh
appears to be well along the way to cleaning up its
industrial safety practices. In the aftermath of Bhopal,
says Madhya Pradesh Labor Secretary S. C. Gupta, the
first thing his department did was assemble a team of
experts to undertake a quick survey of industries that
handle chemicals in the state. The team surveyed 61
chemical units, found some deficiencies, and then
suggested remedial measures.
"Another action was to give an assignment to Engineers of India Ltd., a design firm, to do safety audits
of 11 industries engaged in the manufacture or use of
chemicals," he says. "They inspected those units and
gave interim reports and pinpointed the deficiencies
that were detrimental to health and safety. We wanted
to know whether they were detrimental to the health
and safety of the workers and whether there could be
dangers posed to localities.
"In another activity, the state has established a committee of senior secretaries to examine the question of
setting down norms and procedures for ensuring the
protection of villages situated in areas affected by the
construction of pollution-prone industries. They have
a large charter, covering steps for the approval of
their operations on environmental grounds, criteria
for site selection of major industrial complexes, and
procedures for the regular inspection and certification
of such facilities. The committee is also examining
which parts of existing laws and regulations need to
be modified or amended.
Gupta put together another team to examine the
central government's Factories Act rules and regulations that dir~ctly relate to industrial health and safety. "We found certain lacunae," he reports. "If our
inspectors were to find a certain deficiency in a unit,
they had no power to suspend operations. There was
also no penalty for failure to carry out the recommendations. So we are suggesting that inspectors be given
the power to revoke or suspend until deficiencies are
rectified. The current penalties are no deterrent. They

16

give three months to carry out improvements, plus a
fine of only 2000 rupees."
The Factories Act does not obligate company management to keep communities informed of dangers,
nor does it require preventive measures that could be
taken. "Many of us did not know the UeIL factory
could pose such a danger," Gupta says. ~1Management]
never mentioned anywhere whether any raw material
was toxic. [It] had no obligation to tell us about any
change in the process."
In New Delhi itself, reform of the Factories Act is
under debate. The urge for reform certainly seems to
exist in India, especially in the chemically developed
areas around Bombay. The press is quick now to report leaks allover India. Each state has appointed
independent inspection teams, trained in chemical
engineering, to survey danger spots.
But although the Indian technical community is
paying heed to the country's own deficiencies, it is
also insisting that the West refrain from regarding the
country as a technological backwater.
"Chemical accidents before and after Bhopal in the
developed countries show that chemical technology is
not necessarily managed more intelligently there,"
says chemist G. Thyagarajan, a Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research laboratory director and head of
the government's technical Bhopal investigation team.
IIRunaway reactions do not make a distinction between developing and developed countries. Did
Flixborough [the 1974 chemical disaster in England]
happen in a de~eloping country? Did the Seveso poisonous gas leak occur in a poor developing country?
Why did a toxic gas leak occur last August in a Union
Carbide plant whose safety was said to have been
beefed up by the spending of $5 million?"
There is no lack of scientific and technological talent and imagination in India. Indian scientists point
to the giant government-owned Indian Petrochemicals Ltd. (IPCL) complex at Baroda that licenses western technology, and the privately owned National
Organic Chemicals India Ltd. (NOCIL) pestiCide plant
at rural Chiplun, south of Bombay. Managers in those
plants all make the point of saying UCIL's operation
at Bhopal was not representative of' anything near
what indigenous Indians can do. Discussions with
Indian scientists, engineers, industrial management
figures, bureaucrats, journalists, and activists all lead
to that one point. The feeling is that Carbide bungled
Bhopal badly. It was trying to push a product, Sevin,
whose market potential in India was dwindling. It knew
it, was hoping to sell off its Bhopal plant, and had virtually given up on it. The stage seemed set for disaster.
As far as the long-term effects of Bhopal on India'.
consciousness, even activists are pessimistic. Says Vijay
Varma, a physicist at Delhi University, who is active
in the reform of science education in Madhya Pradesh:
IIBhopal happens and the general feeling is that it is
an act of Providence, not likely to happen again. I
think the West will learn from Bhopal more than we
Decetnber 2. 1985 C&EN

