Crucial court decision approaches in suits by Bhopal victims
at has been 10

months since most of
I1e 119 lawsuHs flied In the u.s. on
behalf
individual Bhopal victims
against Union Carbide were consolIdated In the U.S. District Cowt 'or the
Southern DIstrict In Manhattan. Nearly
eight months have passed since the
government of india sued Carbide In

0'

the same eotn. and more than row
months have elapsed since Carbide
moved to have the actions dismissed
on the grooods that the U.S. was not
the proper lorOOl for the case. How.
with much of the prelinWlary legal WOItc
completed, the stage Is set lor a decIsion crucial 10 all parties.
On Jan. 3, 1986, attorneys lor both
sides will present oral arguments on
the dismissal motion to federal judge
John F. Keenan. who Is presiding over
the proceedings. In the Manhattan COl rt
Judge Keenan's ruling on the dismissal motion could come on the sama
day or after a period of consideration.
It is also possible. thotq1 not expected.
,hat the Judge could request additional Information before issuing his roI-

Ing.
Whatever the timetable, the too.e
course of the case In the U.S., and,
probably, the tack of tutla'S settlement
negotiations. hinges on the ruling. If
the case remains In the U.S., Carbide
could ultimately 'ace American-scale
damages, which are lar higher than
those generallY awarded for personal
Injwy In Indian ccuts. Therefore, legal
experts believe. 1he company's bargaining position would be weakened
and India could demand more money
to settle Its suit. On the other hand, a
ruling for dismissal would strengthen
Carbide's negotiation stance. Negotiations have been stalled, apparently
awaiting the court ruling, since a
reported $300 million offer by Carbide

was twned down by the Indians last

summer.
Key to the ruling Is the Judge's Interpretation of Ute briefs and oral arguments in the light of forum non
conveniens, a legal doctrine that can
be used to determine whether the forum chosen by the plaintiffs Is a suit·
able tribunal. Carbide's contention, under the doctrine, Is that the actions
should be moved to India because the
disaster occurred there. the plaintiffs
are all Indians living there, "essential"
witnesses and evidence are located
there, and many suits have been flied
there. Underlying the company's point
of view Is its Insistence that whatever
liability may be involved should not
Include Union Carbide Corp., the parent firm, but only Union Carbide India
ltd. (UCIL). the company which operated the Bhopal plant and which Is
owned 50.90/0 by the parent firm.
AHomeys for the plaintiffs .. on the
other hand, have argued that the parent firm Is responsible for the acts of
lis subsidiary. Acceptance of that premIse, they contend, means many Important witnesses and much crucial evidence on the design of the plant and
control of Its operation are located In
1he U.S. And that. they say, makes the
U.S. court the proper ono.
Because Carbide holds that the parent firm is not liable In the case, It·
wanted 10 shield itself 'rom discovery Inquiries until after the forum Issue was decided. The plaintiffs,
conversely, argued that since the liability of the parent firm was critical to
their contention that the case should
stay In the U.S., they needed a discovery period before final arguments on
the dismissal motion were heard. Judge
Keenan, looking .or a middle road,
allowed a limited discovery, under

will here. As long as the government is doing the
enforcing, the process will be too corrupted. The only
meaningful solution is for independent experts to
take over enforcement."
Even activist Sadgopal has second thought!;. I'lt is
amazing that we have not been able to explain the
sociopolitical issues involved in the Bhopal tragedy
even to the people of Bhopal-the role of the
multinational, the kind of development model we
Dec:enlber 2. 1985 C&EN

which only Interrogatories related directly to the forum issue were permitted.
Most
the information learned In
discovery will not be made public until
the briefs are filed, but Bud G. Holman,
Carbide's chief attorney, says his side's
Inquiries uncovered "an enormous
amount of information favorable to
Union Carbide. " He asserts, for instance, that Involvement of Indian engineers In the design and construction
of the Bhopal plant was greater than
previously thought. Michael V. Ciresi
of Robins, Zelle, Larson & Kaplan. the
law firm representing India, declines
to comment on what his side learned
from discovery. citing a .confidentiality
order by the judge.
At the same time that the legal
watershed grows nearer, Carbide
seems fo be increaSingly emphasizing
the theory that sabotage, rather than
an Inadvertent action, was responsible
for the accident. lawyer Holman admits he has no direct evidence of
sabotage, but says that ge"'n9 the
water into the tank "was so improbably
Inadvertent that our conclusion Is that
It was deliberate." He adds that the'
plant library contained Information that
would have been useful to a saboteur
and that It was open to most employees.
Ciresi scorns the sabotage theory
as "the product of a runaway Imagination. They have no facts to support
It. I I he says, "and they know It."
If Judge Keenan rules In favor of
Carbide on the forum Issue. the plaintiffs will have the right to appeal. If the
case Is kept In the U.S .• Ciresi says,
the plaintiffs' attorneys will try to move
It to tria' quickly. with discovery cut
off by the end of June. the summer for
pretrial motions. and an opening trial
Sept. 1, 1986.
date
David Webber, New York

0'

0'

have chosen, in whidt the use of such pesticides and
highly toxic materials is allowed, or the character of
science and technology as practiced in the country, or
the suppression of vital medical and scientific information by Carbide assisted by our government.
Gokhale is an especially dramatic figure, in' some
ways a character out of a Greek tragedy. He wants his
fellow Indians to know that his company has made
every effort to demonstrate that the Carbide family

17

