COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
MEASURES TAKEN AT BHOPAL

Introduction
The Director-General, Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research, Dr. S. Varadarajan, had
planned to visit the Regional Research Laboratory of CSIR at Bhopal on 5th December,
1984. He was asked by the Cabinet Secretary
on 4th December to coordinate all scientific
efforts at Bhopal in relation to situation following the leakage of toxic material on the early
morning of Monday, the ard December, 1984.
Dr. Varadarajan and other scientists and
technologists and officials from CSIR and
other organisations were in Bhopal from 5th
to 20th December. A list of those who were
present in Bhopal at various times is given in
Annexure I.

General Conditions in Bhopal

to hospitals. The medical services were highly
strained to meet this situation.

There were over 300 correspondents, 50 of
whom were foreigners or representing foreign
agencies and television teams were also present.
They were also entering factory and hospitals
freely.
Prior to his departure from Delhi, on 4th
Dec. Dr. Varadarajan arranged for scientific
teams from National Environmental Engineering
Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur, Industrial
Toxicology Research Centre (ITRC), Lucknow
the National Institute of Occupational Health
(NIOH) of ICMR, Ahmedabad, to arrive in
Bhopal on 5th December, 1984. A Central
Coordinating Cell was set up on 5th atRRL,
Bhopal headed by Professor P .K. Rohtagi
Director of the Laboratory. Appropriate analytical and testing facilities and transport were
arranged for scientists who arrived. Accommodation was also arranged for the large number of
scientists and technologists arriving in Bhopal.

It was found that there were very considerable tragic consequences as a result of the leakage of toxic material and several deaths had
been reported and many, deaths continued to
occur on 5th. There were also considerable
Following a meeting with the Chief Minisworry about the safety of air and water. The ter, Mr. Arjun Singh, State Government officials
factory work had been stopped and police and Mr. Vasant Sathe, Minister for Chemicals &
had been posted. A case had been registered Fertilisers on the 5th morning, Dr. Varadarajan
by the CBI against five officers of factory and accompanied Mr. Sathe to the factory and had
who were also under arrest within the factory discussions with the Factory Manager and also
premises. Most of the factory workers were accompanied Mr. Sathe to inpect the locatIon
also not available. A large contingent of police of the MIC plant, MIC underground tanks,
occupied the factory premises. All the shops storage area and plant control room. Subsequent
had been closed. Transport facilities were not to the departure of Mr. Sathe, further discusreadily available. Telecommunication facilities sions were also held with the Factory, Manager
were extremely poor and had been disrupted. and the Assistant lVlanager and it was found for
A large number of animals had also died. Dis- the first time that a further 15 tonnes of MIC
posal of the dead as well as the disposal of was present in the second tank No. 611 and this
animal carcasses presented serious problems. could also be involved in a further release of
With still many doubts about the toxic nature toxic material at any time. This further posed
of water, air and foodstuffs, there was consi- a new hazard to a large num ber of visitors,
derable fear among the pUblic. A large numbers police and civil officials in the factory and in
affected outside of Bhopal were being brought the vicinity outside the factory as well as to
19

