also confirmed that the alkali scrubber was
designed to feed liquid MIC into liquid alkali
solution for destruction. H gaseous emissions
occur, the alkali scru bber would not at all be
adequate to neutralise the material and the gas
would leak out. It was also noted that MIC is a
liquid under normal room conditions as it has
a boiling point of 390 C. The temperature in
the tank could be measured only in the portion
above the liquid level and it was about 18o C.
However, it was stated that the temperatures
in the tanks 610 was noted at about 180 C at
2345 brs. on 2nd December by an operator
before a shift change which occurred before
0000 hours. However, the new shift operator
noticed the pressure rise from 2310 hours on
2nd December and very soon after gaseous
materials leaked out and this leak continued
from 2315 hours on 2nd December to about
0115 hours on ard December. The pressure
release occurred obviously due to rupture of
the disc designed to withstand pressure 40 lbs.
per sq. inch (just about 2 1/2 atmosphere).
The safety valve would have obviously opened.
It was also found that the safety valve returned
to place after the gas leaked when the pressure
had fallen back.

In these circumstances it was noted that
there was no opportunity for a slow rise in
temperature and pressure in tank 610. It was
not unlikely that a similar rapid rise in temperature would occur in tank 611 and there would
be insufficient time for warning being given of
the impending leakage. There may not be time
to feed the liquid material in the alkali scrubber
for destruction also.

300 C, the boiling point and the remaining MIC
could evaporate as a gas rapidly. By calculations, it was noted that 4.5 tonnes of water
would be needed to react with 45 tonnes of
MIC present in tank 610. However, it was
pointed out by Dr. Varadarajan that 1.5 tonnes
of water could be sufficient to react with
one-third of the MIC and the heat produced
from such a reaction could be sufficient to
evaporise the remaining 30 tonnes. The reaction of large quantities of water with MIC
could produce Tri-methyl Biuret (TMB) or
Di-Methyl Urea. (DMU) .
An alternative to the reaction with large
quantities of water was polymerisation of MIC.
This produces a trimer or a linear polymer
depending on the condition for polymerisation. The heat generated in such polymerisation would also allow a third of MIC to polymerise and at the same time evaporate the
remaining MIC as a gas. T·he factory staff, was
maintaining that polymerisation could not
occur since analysis previously carried out of
MIC had always indicated presence of phosgene varying from 200 to 1200 parts per
million.
Since tank 610 had been put under the
control of CBI and it was considered unwise
and risky to attempt opening of the tank, for
-examination of the material, if any, present in
tank 610. In these circumstances, it was not
proven whether tank 610 contained any material
and if any MIC remained in the tank or if any
other material was present.

Dr. Varadaraj81i recorded these conclusions
on the probable causes of gas leakage on a note
prepared at 1255 hrs. on 5th December and a
copy was handed over to the Factory Manager.
It was therefore concluded that there was high
risk of any further toxic material being leaked
from tank 611. Steps were initiated to have two
operators to watch the temperature recording
instrument of tank 611 on a continuous shift
basis and also to watch pressures so that in the
event of any indication of change, warning alann
could be activated and possible steps taken to
Based on these discussions and on the minimise damage which would undoubtedly be
general knowledge of chemistry of MIC, it large under the conditions then prevailing.
was surmised that the leakage of material
could occur by substantial quantity of water
Later in the evening of the same day disreacting with MIC. This is an exothermic reac- cussions wet"e held in the Union Carbide Retion. Reaction with a part of the material search Centre, Bhopal with Managing Director
could raise the temperature welL above the Mr. Gokhale and Vice-President Mr. Kamdar
It was revealed during the discussions with
the Factory Manager that phosgene present to
the extent of 200 or 300 parts per million in
MIC acted as inhibitor for polymerisation.
Analysis of MIC in the tank is not. ~~rmally
possible because there are no facIlities for
drawing out samples. The analyses are g~ne~y
carried out by drawing samples from plpelmes.
for delivering MIC into the tank or for withdrawing MIC for transfer to reaction vessels.

21

