of the Company and with Dr. Srivastava, Director of Research and other Scientific staff of the
Research Centre, Dr. Varadarajan asked fOi"
some samples drawn earlier in the factory
pipelines of MIC were to be analysed in the
factory as well as in the Research Centre. MIC
was also converted by give Trimer and Linear
Polymer. Infra red spectra of these were also
recorded. Data on the heat of these reactions
and specific heat of MIC and the boiling point
of MIC under different pressure were also
obtained from literature and reports. These
enabled Dr. Varadarajan to establish clearly
that the reaction of MIC with large qu~nti­
ties of water or by polymerisation as stated
in the recorded note of that morning could
result in a large quantity of MIC to become
gas at a temperature of 60 0 C which would
lead to rupture of the disc and release of gas.
The analytical methods for detennination of
phosgene were also examined.
After further detailed discussions, the
Union Carbide officials stated that a team
of four scientists technologists and one occupational health scientist were arriving on 6th
December in Bhopal from USA. It was also
found that only the factory Manager and the
Assistant Manager of Union Carbide India had
any knowledge of MIC and its reactions. It
was felt that the team proposed by Union
Carbide Management was insufficient to provide adequate information and they were
finally asked to arrange for a further set of
specialists
of Union Carbide, USA such as
those from research and chemical operation
Managers familiar with Bhopal plant and the
USA plant to come immediately. This team
arrived on 12th December.
Union Carbide were also persuaded to bring
from Calcutta one Mr. Parikh who has been
previously Assistant Manager in Bhopal.
Additional information was obtained from
Union Carbide officials
showed that MIC is
highly toxic and pure MIC polymerises readily
in the presence of iron, copper and other metal
catalysts. Commercial MIC was stated to be
safe. It was said phosgene is present as inhibitor of polymerisation. No specifications for
commercial materials could be obtained. No
information was also available from the Union
Carbide on even the probable causes of the
conditions leading to the leakage.

Further discussions were held with the
Union Carbide, USA team on the night of
6th December, 1984. They could not provide
any further information on the probable causes
of the accident, or of any investigation on
previous small accidents wit MIC.
Furthermore, the analytical procedure of
Union Carbide determination of phosgene were
re-examined by Dr. Varadarajan and he found
this was based on conversion of phosgene to
hydrogen chloride. On the morning of 7th
December, Dr. Varadarajan came to the conclusion that a small quantity of water of the
order of 1 kg entering the tank 610 could
react first with phosgene present at ppm level
and convert it to hydrogen chloride. Hydrogen
chloride could itself initiate polymerisation.
Chloride can also react with stainless steel and
lead to iron impurity which again could cause
polymerisacion. Further discussions were held
on the morning of 7th with the Factory Manager
and Assistant Manager and a note was recorded
on Dr. Varadarajan's suggestion that the release
of toxic material contained in tank 610 was
due to small quantities of water. It was established that such small quantities could
come from Nitrogen gas obtained by direct
pipelines from a neighbo\JIing factory or also
from tube and shell condenser used for distillation of MIC in the MIC plant. He was also
able to establish by further analyses, that the
analytical method employed by Union Carbide
could not sufficiently and clearly distinguish
between phosgene and hydrogen chloride.
This was also confirmed by adding quantities of hydrogen chloride to MIC and estimating phosgene. It was found that at least a proportion of the added hydrogen chloride was
reported as phosgene.
The note recorded was also handed over
to Union Carbide Manager immediately. It
was established by these theories and experiments that adequate amount of
phosgene
may not necessarily be present in MIC Tank
611 to act as inhibitor and there may also be
chloride which could act as initiator of polymerisation. The risk of further reaction and
release of toxic gas from tank 611 was therefore very real.
iv)

Action for minimising damage due to
further leakage-

Since it was clear that there was potential

22

