risk of some further leakage, the State Government was immediately informed on 5th and
again on 7th December of such a danger. They
were also advised that personnel including
police, not needed in the factory should be
removed from the factory premises and entry
to the factory should be severely restricted.
All entries were from then on were to be made
by special passes issued by Dr. Varadarajan.
These measures took 3 or 4 days to become
fully effective. Scientists were posted in the
factory under the control of Dr. Varadarajan
to ensure observance of precautions.

any untoward event occured. The factory area
and surrounding areas were continuously sprayed With water. The factory compound was
covered up to a practical height with special
stands and wet cloth material.

In addition, a special Wireless Communication System was established between the
Factory, the control room at the State Sectt.
Another control room established in the BHEL
Guest House. A Hot line between the BHEL
Guest House to the office and residence of
Cabinet Secretary at Delhi was also established.
A 24 hour operation Communication Cell was
In cooperation with Shri P.P. Nayyar, established in CSIR Headquarters at New Delhi.
Secretary in the Cabinet Sectt. a number of A 'No Delay Demand Telephone Service' from
measures were devised to educate the public. Bhopal to other points was also established
All precautions to be taken were noted and from the BHEL Guest House Control Room.
a note on 'Dos' and 'DO'NTs' was prepared
Additional BSF aircraft and helicopters
and handed over to the State Government.
State Government was also advised to remove were also made available by the Cabinet Sectt.
to enclosed buildings and structures, personnel for bringing personnel and material to Bhopal.
living in slums and open areas in the vicinity
A Special Officer was appointed by the
of the factory. Public were informed of the
risks and were also advised to use wet towels State Government at the BHEL Guest Room
in the event of any indication of further leaka- Control Room to coordinate communications
ge so that MIC breathing could be through wet and for attending to emergencies. A similar
material and MIC could be retained and des- Cell was established with officers of the State
troyed by contact with water. Personnel re- Government at the Sectt. Control Room.
maining in the factory were provided towels
Action for Safe Disposal of Material
and water bottles. Arrangements were also v)
ofMIC:
made to obtain 100 gas masks from the Navy
for use of persons remaining in the factory in
The following alternatives were considered
the event of further leakage.
for safe disposal of MIC:
During the meeting in Delhi of the Cabinet
Removal of liquid MIC under pressure
Committee on Political Affairs during the i)
using nitrogen and dumping into a very
early hours of (Sunday) 9th December, 1984
large volume of water. No arrangerisks of further danger to leakage were exments for larger quantity of water in
plained by Dr. Varadarajan, and various meaa contained environment can be made.
sures for protection of the public were appThis was therefore not feasible.
roved. In addition for containment of material
within the factory immediately several meaThe transfer of liquid MIC to the liquid
sures were introduced. Arrangements were ti)
alkaline solution in the alkali scrubber:
made to cut out portion of the high level pipeline outlet of the gas in the factory and weld
While this could be carried out, it was
additional pipeline so that the outlet could be
found that MIC contained 1% or more
brought into a frame structure which was
of chloroform and this would react to
surrounded by a large amount of cloth on all
product carbene. Even a tiny quantity
sides. The continuous spray of large inputs of
of carbene produces an obnoxious
water by special pipes and by fire hoses was
odour. Larger quantities will produce
maintained so that in the event of any MIC
very undesirable odour. This might
escape, it can first react with water. A set of
create panic exodus and stampede in
helicopters and small aircraft were also brought
the population. This method of desin for spraying water and to neutralise the
troying MIC could be resorted to In
gas through large quantity of water if and when
0)' )

_0)

