an emergency if the temperature and
pressure in the tank increased at any
time but it was decided not desirable
if· other alternatives could be found.
Nevertheless adequate supply of alkali
was arranged to be brought to the
factory and stored for use. It was estimated that the disposal of MIC through
alkali scrubber might involve an operation of 6 to 8 days.
iii)

Prior to that date, all precautionary measures mentioned in the earlier sections could be
fully completed. It was decided that every
action would have the approval of Dr. Varadarajan and the team of scientists and technologists assembled by him. It also provided an
opportunity for informing the factory staff
and arrange for their return, restoration of
confidence and completion of further measures
in the factory for operations.

Conversion of MIC Carbaryl products
by reaction of alpha Naphthol:

A formal communication from Union
Carbide, USA team was accordingly recorded
on 12th December, 1984 and addressed to
Dr. Varadarajan,
fully agreeing with the
measures proposed by him. Subsequently,
the Chainnan of Union Carbide, USA also sent
a communication to Foreign Secretary withdrawing his earlier suggestion on starting processing on 6th December and fully endorsing
the actions proposed by Dr. Varadarajan namely
starting operations on 16th December.

This was considered the best procedure as factory staff were trained for
this ope~ation and facilities including
instrumentation were available. Arrangements were made to release alpha Naphthol impounded by Customs in Bombay
(about 30 tonnes) and brought by a
convoy of lorries with Police escort to
Bhopal. Adequacy of supplies of solvent
catalysts and other materials was
Since it was felt that the ingress of small
ensured.
quantities of water and metal contamination
could arise from inlets into tank 611 from
Union Carbide, USA team as well as the connections to the reactor distillation unit
Chairman gf Union Carbide, USA were urging and- from the nitrogen supply. All existing
the MIC material was stable and it should be pipeline connections were closed or removed.
processed immediately from 6th December A new Nitrogen pipeline was established. Visits
onwards. Through a detailed study of all fac- were made to the Nitrogen providing factory
tors, Dr. Varadarajan came to the conclusion and analytical procedure for nitrogen Instithat the risk of untoward leakage existed at tute. In the pipeline system drying agents and
all times and processing of MIC would involve filters were introduced to ensure high purity.
disturbance of the tank by supply of Nitrogen. All measures were recorded and instructions
In the event of sudden reaction, precautionary issued and changes were carried out under the
measures outlined in the earlier sections availa- supervision of Scientists team.
ble before 10 days. The public also would not
be adequately informed to take precautions.
The information on starting of these operaIt was decided by Dr. Varadarajan that it would tions was provided through a Broadcast by
be better to institute a number of meaSlUes the Chief Minister on 12th December, 1984.
within the factory, in the immediate vicinity Those who felt it was unsafe to stay, arranged
of the factory, and for the public at large before to leave Bhopal and it is estimated about 80,000
processing is started. It was agreed with the persons left Bhopal but in an orderly manner.
Chief Minister that notice of seventy two hours Additional trains and transport were arranged
be given before processing commenced. A to facilitate movement. About 6,000 to 10,000
series of discussions were also held with the people who were living in open areas were
factory management as well as Union Carbide provided shelter in Schools and other buildings
Corporation team on the relative risks involved by State Government.
in the starting of processing around 7th December or a few days later. As a result, it was
Detailed information on the operations
possible to come to an unanimous conclusion proposed was provided in a Press Conference
that the least risk alternative was to process by Dr. Varadarajan on 15th December, 1984
the lVIIC for conversion to Carbaryl from the to about 300 Press Correspondents. Two parties
morning of Sunday the 16th December, 1984. of Press representatives of 25 persons each were

24

