taken to the Factory under supelVlSlon and
detailed measures deployed were exhibited so
that full and correct information could be
provided.
Operations started on the morning of 16th
December and were completed on 22nd December, 1984. All instruments were replaced by no
defect instruments. At one stage the addition
of phosgene to the MIC in tank 611 was considered as a method of improving the stability
and phosgene was brought in by helicopter from
Bulsar. At this stage an additional team from
USA arrived and they were not able to give
any assurance that phosgene itself acted as an
inhibitor for polymerisation. Although arrangements were made for purifying phosgene so
that it is metal free and provision for adding
this material with due precautions to the tank
were made, on receiving information of uncertainty of this acting as an inhibitor, it was
decided not to proceed with the addition of
phosgene.
Immediately after 5th December, arrangements were also made to establish four weather
monitoring stations with the cooperation of
India Meteorological Department. Two hourly
observations were made in the stations on
temperature, wind velocity and wind direction.
With this information, it was possible to know
direction of wind and on the probability of
inversions occuring. Inversions tend to contain
any toxic material released for long periods.
With information on wind direction, it was
also possible to have a system for warning
specific wards and areas in the city of Bhopal
in the event of any untoward release of toxic
material. The same system was used throughout
the period of operations of conversion of MIC
into carbaryl. In addition, a system of detection of MIC in air was established in the factory
so that even small release of MIC could be
detected. No MIC was found throughout this
period.

empty tank 619 were not functioning and it
was learnt that these were sealed by CBI. The
estimates of MIC were made from the records
provided by the factory management. However,
after the first day operation on 16th December,
it was possible to judge quickly from the gas
pressure of tank 610 that the material present
in tank 611 was in excess by about 4 tonnes.
Adequate arrangements were made to ensure
availability of alpha naphthol for conversion
of the additional material. Similarly note was
taken of the MIC material (about 1.2 tonnes)
stored in sealed drums. Special arrangements
were then instituted for drawing material from
such drums. The tank 619 was also found to
contain over 2 tonnes of material. This was
also withdrawn and converted. The operations
had therefore to be extended by about 2 days.
About 3-4 tonnes could be processed each day.
The transfer of MIC from tank was done during
day light hours and conversion to carboryl
was carried out throughout the night. Representatives of Scientists' team were present
throughout this operation day and night and
operations for each transfer of material were
approved by Dr. Varadarajan and the team.
Trial reactions in the factory laboratory were
carried out with material in tank 611, 619 and
drums separately to ensure these materials
would fully react with alpha naphthol. Transfering of bulk materials were approved after
such trials in each case.
Throughout this period, adequate precautions for spraying water and for test flights
of aircraft for sprays were continued. Special
arrangements were also made at the airport
for communications so that in the event of
any leakage, aircraft could be brought in for
action. The entry into the factory of personnel,
material and vehicles was strictly controlled
throughout this period. Reports on the progress
of operations were made twice a day to the
press during the initial three days and subsequently once a day. As the material in tanks was
used up, the level of potential damage decreaseq
and once all the tank material was utilised, it
was possible to declare that the environment
would be safe. As MIC was present only in 180
Kg. steel drums. Finally all pipelines were
drained off of MIC and used during the entire
period, the alkali scrubber was operated.

At one stage there were reports from some
investigators, not forming part of the team, that
cyanide levels in air in excess of permissible
limits were detected. A large investigation was
carried out to see if this could be verified by
using special tubes for detection of minute
amount of cyanide, flown in from !PCL Baroda
Assistance to health and medical aualong with appropriate experts. Throughout (vi)
thorities
the period, no cyanide was detected in the air.
The liquid level indicator in tank 611 and the Scientists from All India Instt. of Medical

2:>

