Sciences, Patel Chest Institute and Indian
Council of Medical Research visited and stayed
for substantial periods in Bhopal. They visited
hospitals and had discussions with the Director
of Medical Services and the Heads of hospitals
and were able to monitor the treatment given
for heavy toxicity affecting lungs as well as
to those whose eyes were effected. A wealth
of information was obtained from observations as well as from the post mortem examinations. This will be of considerable value in
future. Special assistance was also given for
analysis of materials drawn from patients and
also during post mortem examination.
A number of foreign medical personnel had
also visited Bhopal and were offering advice
Discussions were also held with such medical
scientists from Germany, USA, France and
Scandanavian countries.
(vii)

Collection of materials for future examination

Arrangements were made for collecting material from post mortem examination and
organs and tissues have been preserved along
with data on symptoms and conditions of
patients before death. Additional material
from animal carcasses has also been collected.
The histories of patients and if the dead from
whom collection of samples was made, has
also been recorded so that the effects of MIC
over a period of exposure could be examined.
Later on, there were also certain deial'~d effects and return of patients and observations have
been made on them.
Samples have also been collected of plant
specimens, leaves etc. Observations have been
made to see if any deterioration has not taken
place. These materials are also being analysed
by ICAR as well as CSIR Laboratories.
(viii)

Coordination of efforts:

As mentioned earlier a Coordinating Cell for
this purpose was set up in RRL, Bhopal where
a meeting of all scientific groups were held at
1400 hours daily. Written reports were made
by each group every day. These have been
collected and oral reports were also made in
such meetings. As a result some additional tasks
were also given to scientific groups.
Special arrangements were also made to

26

have scientific groups from ICMR, Patel Chest
Institute, AIIMS, National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Cancer Research Centre, Indian
Agricultural Research Institute and other institutions of ICAR, the Defence Research Laboratories in addition to those from CSIR Laboratories. Visits by Director-General, ICMR,
Additional Director-General, ICMR, Adviser
(Biotechnology), Department of Science &
Technology, Adviser (Chemicals) and other
officials from Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers were also arranged. Extensive investigations were also conducted by the Additional
Director-General, ICMR. Special arrangements
were also made for reserving certain number of
seats on lAC flights between Delhi and Bhopal
and for the reception of personnel accommodation and transport. Laboratory facilities
were also provided at RRL, Bhopal.
The various institutes were asked to make
literature surveys regarding the toxic effects
of MIC and related isocynates and a large
amount of material became available. In addition material has been received from international organisations and research institutes.
Throughout this period, the Scientists of
CSIR carried out a large number of analyses
in the factory and in the research centre of
UCIL Bhopal. These analytical results proved
useful in drawing up the course of action in
the processing of MIC and in estimating the
risk.
Towards the end of operations for conversion of MIC, it was decided to open the
safety valve and the section connected to
tank 610 after taking necessary precautions.
A certain amount of solid material has been
replaced. The original safety valve and the
ruptured disc have been handed over t
CBI.
The material collected from this section has
been subjected to preliminary investigation
in CSIR Laboratories and in the IPeL Research Centre. From this, "appears there is no
TUB or TMB present. Most of the material
consists of trimmer and there is some amount
of volatiles. No DMU or TMB has been found.
The examinations are being carried out and
results of which are awaited. Analysis for
trace metals has also been made and presence
of metals has been recorded. Small quantity
of material from inside the tank 610 has also
been recovered for examination which is in
progress. However immediately after these

