efforts, in the case of petition filed by some scientists should be named by Dr. Varada raj an.
citizens of Madhya Pradesh, the High Court Detailed information is awaited.
ordered that tank 610 should not be opened
and no further examination be made.
Since the senior factory staff were under
arrest and confined to factory premises, orders
From the examination made so far it appears for start of operations could not be issued by
that the incident in tank 610 took place as a them. They cooperated fully with the team of
result of polymerisation and not due to the the Government despite these restrictions. It
input of large quantities of water. It appears was necessary that the factory operations
that there was rapid polymerisation of a portion were carried out with senior factory staff
of the material and the temperature may have acting on their own free will. The release of
risen over lOOoC, possibly l50 C. This high these staff on bail was requested by Dr. Varapressure and temperature was obviously main- darajan and a communication was sent to
tained in the tank after rupturing of disc and Chief Secretary. The Court then arranged the
lifting off safety valve. This could be possible release of these staff for a limited period coverbecause of the pipeline leading to the alkali ing the time of operations for conversion of
scrubber' allowed only the outflow of the MIC. Although factory staff was reluctant to
gaseous material at a certain rate and the tank avail of bail under such restrictions but they
maintained high temperature well over 100 were persuaded by Dr. Varadarajan to accept
degrees for more than 1 to 11h hours. It appears these conditions.
some thermal cracking could have also occurred
Constant communications were maintained
because of such high temperature. This could
lead to conversion of MIC to polymer and some with the Cabinet Secretary and other officials
other products such as methylamine, ammonia of the Central Government, State Government
and dimethylamine. A strong smell of ammonia and the Chief Minister. A meeting was also held
and amones was noted from the solid samples with Mr. Soares, a Congressman from USA and
found from the safety valve section. The trimer the officials of the U.S. Embassy in Delhi who
melts at these high temperature and could have visited Bhopal.
volatalised and crystallised in the tube section
Since the Chairman of Union Carbide USA
of the safety valve. Further hypotheses of the
actual occurrence has to await fuller recovery had been sending messages regarding the risk of
of the material in tank 610 and determination remaining material and urging processing this
of the total quantity of such material left in material from 6th, it was arranged for the
Foreign Secretary to send a message to the
the tank.
Chairman, Union Carbide of USA asking him
The High Court passed orders that three lots to send specifications of material which could
of 5 Kg. samples from tank 611 should be pre- be considered safe and methods of analysis
served. Scientific reports were supplied to the of such materials. He was also informed by the
Court through the State Government stating Foreign Secretary that in the opinion of Dr.
that there are no facilities for storing such large Varadarajan there were high risks in processing
quantities and it would be unsafe to store them materials from 6th and precaution could not be
in glass bottles or containers. Subsequently the adequately ensured for minimising the risks
High Court passed orders that 5 samples of within the factory and to the popUlation in
300 gms. each should be preserved for future Bhopal who were unprepared for such risks.
examination. Although the risk is there, the No reply was received regarding specifications
orders have been complied with and the ma- or tests. However, Chairman, Union Carbide
terial has been stored in glass bottles with USA finally sent a message endorsing actions
covers for holding the pressure. Such material proposed for conversion of material from 16th.
can polymerise any time and can release gaseous
MIC' Adequate precautions have been taken Concluding remarks
and staff have been warned about such a risk.
The High Court appears to have passed an order These very large set of operations would not
that detailed examination of these samples have been possible but for the large amount of
should be made in the presence of two groups interest and cooperation and series of measures
of scientists one from CSIR and one from taken by the Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and these Chemicals and Fertilizers, Ministry of Home

27

