in part the chloride and fully all other materials in the residue of tank 610. From the products
found in the residue, the calculated amount of heats of chemical reactions and the extent of bulging
of the exhumed tank, it is surmised that the temperatute in the tank rose above 2500 C at the time
of the accident. It has been observed, in preliminary laboratory experiments that pure MIC made
by a route which does not involve phosgene or chloroform, when subjected to heating 300°C
produces small amounts of hydrogen cyanide. In the presence of chloroform, hydrogen cyanide
formation is not found. Further experiments at higher temperatures are planned.

A detailed analysis of the features of design of the plant has been made together with the
characteristics of MIC, MIC, when contaminated with traces of metallic impurities, which act as
catalysts, undergoes a violent polymerisation, and the heat generated can volatilise a large proportion of MIC. The gas is highly toxic on inhalation. Use of iron, steel, aluminium, zinc, galvanised
iron, tin, copper are prohibited from use in areas where MIC can come in contact. Commercially
produced MIC cOlltains phosgene which according to Union Carbide, acts as inhibitor of polymerisation. It is estimated that ingress of a few litres of water would lead to the elimination of phosgene
and hydrolysable chlorides and produce hydrochloric acid which in turn can produce metallic
impurities by reaction with the tank.
There are no facilities for collecting MIC produced separately in each shift and the material
is directly led into the storage tanks without batchwise analysis. There are no on-line analysers.
Similarly, nitrogen from a neighbouring factory is fed directly into the storage tanks, without full
intermediate storage and quality determination. Carbon steel sections are used in the connectors to
the storage tanks. Copper tubes are used in connectors to the level instruments of the tank. The
system of instruments for alarm to indicate sudden increase in temperature are not suited to the
conditions of operation. Only a single refrigeration system for cooling of MIC in two tanks was
installed and it had not been operated for some considerable time.
MIC has the combination of properties of very high reactivity with minimum contaminants,
ready volatility to become gas and very high inhalation toxicity. The installed facilities provided for
disposal of unstable liquid MIC in alkali or for the neutralisation of gaseous emissions from violent
reaction, on examination are found to be not capable of meeting the objectives of such disposal in
a very short time of two hours.
The ingress of about 500 kg. of water alone, without metallic contaminants, would have led
to a reaction with three to four tonnes of MIC and gradual rise in temperature to 70°C, below the
boiling point of MIC at the safety valve pressure. The very rapid explosive rise in temperature and
pressure in the tank 610, implies conditions for a run-away trimerisation reaction already existed.
Ingress of water and reaction with MIC would generate carbondioxide evolution and cause mixing.
The storage tank conditions would then equal those in a well mixed reactor, supplied with heat.
Once initiated, the trimerisation reaction had features of auto-catalytic and autothermal reactions
and temperatures increased rapidly to 250°C. The relief valve design could not permit free flow
of large quantities of gases at the level at which they were generated and therefore further reactions continued.
The presence of sodium at levels of 50 to 90 ppm in the samples from residues of tank 610
indicates ingress of some alkali, possibly derived from the Vent Gas Scrubber Accumulator. It is
known that the tank 610 could not be pressurised with nitrogen at any time after 22 October,
1984. The contents of tank 610 were virtually at atmospheric pressure from that date providing
opportunities for entry of metal contaminants. From a' perusal of the reports of the events of the
night of 2/3 December, 1984, it appears during the cleaning of choked filters with water in the Relief Valve Vent Header, such water, perhaps mixed with alkali from Vent Gas Scrubber Accumula-

38

