REPORT ON SCIENTIFIC STUDIES ON THE FACTORS
RELATED TO BHOPAL TOXIC GAS LEAKAGE
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The leakage of a large quantity of highly toxic
gas from a buried tank in which Methyl isocyanate was stored at the Union Carbide plant
at Bhopal on the night of 2/3 December, 1984,
led to the tragic less of life and to serious damage and disabilities of thousands of people.
This is the worst tragedy in the history of
chemical industry. A further quantity of methyl
isocyanate present at that time in another adjacent tank represented a serious hazard of a
further leakage. Through a careful scientific
review of the possible causes of the leakage,
resulting from a violent chemical reaction and
the identification of probable circumstances
and origins of such an event, a number of
measures were adopted to prevent a recurrence
of such an explosive reaction. The Methyl
Isocyanate was processed safely under 'Operation Faith'.
A scientific study of the chemical nature
and reactions of Methyl Isocyanate, the features
of the facilities and controls for its manufacture, storage, utilisation and disposal together
with full examination of the buried tank and
its constituents provides basis for outlining the
factors and circumstances which led to the
violent chemical transformations and rapid
leakage of toxic gas. The results of such a study
are presented in the Report.
1.1 The Bhopal Pesticides Plant
Union Carbide has established a facility for
the manufacture of Sevin (Carbaryl) and its
formulations in their plant at Bhopal in India.
From late 1977, Sevin was manufactured by
using imported primary raw materials, viz.
alpha-naphthol and methyl isocyanate (MIC).
The MIC which was imported was made in
Union Carbide's MIC plant in USA and shipped
in stainless steel drums. However, from early
1980, MIC was manufactured in the Bhopal
plant using the know-how and basic designs
supplied by Union Carbide Corporation, USA
(UCC).
The plant at Bhopal also produced carbon
monoxide and phosgene as intermediates required for the production of MIC.

The manufacturing process for Sevin involves the reaction of a slight excess of alphanaphthol with MIC in the presence of a catalyst
in carbon tetrachloride solvent. The know-how
for the manufacture of Sevin was provided by
UCC.

1.1.1 MIG manufacturing process
The raw materials used to make MIC are monomethylamine (MMA) and phosgene. Chloroform is used as solvent in the MIC process, and
caustic lye for the neutralisation of any toxic
material requiring disposal.
Phosgene is produced by reacting carbon
monoxide and chlorine. Carbon monoxide is
produced by reaction of petroleum coke with
oxygen. Petroleum coke is obtained from an
indigenous supplier, and oxygen is supplied from
a neighbouring air separation plant. Chlorine,
MMA, caustic lye and chloroform are brought
in by tankers and stored in tanks. Facilities for
storage of carbon monoxide and phosgene,
both of which are highly toxic gases, were not
provided. These were utilised for production
of MIC as soon as produced.
MIC is produced by reaction of phosgene
and MMA to methyl-carbamoyl chloride (MCC)
and hydrogen chloride (HCI). MCC is then
pyrolysed to yield MIC and HCI.
The Chemical reactions involved in the
production of MIC via phosgene are as follows:

1. 2C+0

2

2. COtC1
2

~

2 CO

)-

CaC!?

J. COC)2+CH3Nfi2.

)

4.. CH NHCOCJ
3

) CH 3NCO + HCJ

•

CH NI-ICOCl tHe!

3

Phosg~ne

and MMA are reacted in vapour
phase to give MCC. The reaction products are
then quenched in chloroform and fed to Phosgene Stripping Still (PSS). Unreacted phosgene
is removed in PSS and recycled. The bottoms
from PSS are fed to the pyrolyser where MCC
is pyrolysed to give MIC and HCI and MIC and
HCI are separated. The pyrolyser condenser
feeds the MIC Refining Still (MRS). In MRS,
the MIC is separated from the chloroform in
the upper part and is led directly into the

41

