kg/cm 2g. The tank pressure is indicated locally
in the field as well as in the control room and
controlled remotely from the control room by
means of a pressure indicating controller. HP
nitrogen is admitted into the tank through a
make up control valve (make up DMV), the
body material of which is carbon steel. In case
the pressure is higher than the desired value,
nitrogen is vented out into PVH through blow
down control valve (blow down DMV), the
body material of which is again carbon steel.
Each of the MIC storage tanks is provided
with a temperature transmitter on the tank
which indicates the temperature of MIC locally
in the field as well as remotely in the control
room. A high temperature alarm is provided
to alert the operator in the control room in
case the temperature of MIC in the tank rises
beyond the desired limit.
Each MIC storage tank is provided with a
level transmitter to indicate the level of MIC
in the tank. Nitrogen from Gas Blow Back
Header (GBBH) is purged through MIC in the
tank and the level is measured with back pressure. High and low level alarms are provided.
SRV is provided on each MIC storage tank.
A graphite Rupture Disc (RD) is located on the
pipeline between the tank and the SR V. There
is a local pressure gauge provided in between
the RD and the SR V . This would normally
indicate atmospheric pressure. A rise in pressure would indicate failure of the RD. Failure
of RD can be detected only through frequent
inspection at the site of the tank. The outlet
of SRV is of 100 mm(4") nominal diameter.
Three outlets from three tanks are connected
to a single common RVVH, which has 100
mm( 4") nominal diameter.
A common line designed as MIC reject
line is provided from the MIC storage tanks to
send any off~pecification material back to the
MIC plant for reprocessing or to send any
contaminated/off specification MIC to Vent
Gas Scrubber (VGS), where it is neutralised
with caustic solution.

1.1.3 Vent gas scrubber
The Vent Gas Scrubber (VGS) meant to neutralise the toxic exhausts from the MIC plant
and storage system consists of three sections.
The upper section of 1650 mm diameter (5.5
feet) and 5540 mm (18.5 feet) height is packed
up to a height of 4200 mm (14 feet) with
ceramic Berl saddles. The middle section below
the packing is of 1650 mm (5.5 feet) diameter

and 2100 mm (7 feet) height. The third section
comprises an accumUlator, 3600 mm (12 feet)
diameter and 6900 mm (23 feet) height. The
capacity of the accumulator is about 80 m 3
(21000 gal). The material of construction of
VGS is carbon steel.
Gases from RVVH, PVH, MMA Vaporiser SR V and chlorine evaporator SR V are
routed to VGS. The gases get scrubbed in
VGS by a counter current flow of the caustic
solution through the packed-bed in the upper
section of VGS.
The accumuloter is filled with 10% caustic
solution which is circulated through a cycle
cooler to the inlet of the VGS by means of a
circulation pump of about 4500 lpm (1200
gpm) capacity. The strength of the caustic
solution is maintained at 9 to 10% in the accumulator by pumping in fresh caustic solution of
20% strength and process water.
The 20% caustic solution make up capa-_
city is around 95 lpm (25 gpm). The gases entering the scrubber, after being scrubbed with the
10% caustic solution, are either released to the
atmosphere through a stack at a height of
approximately 30.5 meters (100 feet) from
the ground or routed to the flare through a
knock-out pot. The gases coming through
the R VVH and PVH can also be diverted to the
flare directly without passing through VGS.
It is intended that off-specification liquid
MIC from MIC storage tanks can be disposed
off by neutralisation in the VGS accumulator
at a controlled rate.
I

1.1.4 Flare tower
A flare tower has been installed primarily to
burn vent gases from the carbon monoxide

unit and the MMA vapouriser safety valve discharge. The flare also burns normal vent gases
from the MIC storage tanks, MRS and VGS.
Vents from the MIC storage tanks can either
be routed to VGS or directly to the flare.
However, the flare tower is not expected to
handle large release of MIC vapours directly.

1.2 The Eve:lt
Since the accident occurred in the MIC storage
tank 610, it is important to consider information on aspects such as the chemical composition of the contents of the tank, the history of
the material stored and the observations made
by the plant personnel while loading and unloading the tank prior to the actual event.

45

