tank 610 dropped to 0.25 kg/cm 2g abnormally
and the material in tank 610 continued to be
under a low pressure of 0.1 - 0.25 kg/cm 2g
from 22nd October onwards. Recording of
such low values is not an indication of any
positive nitrogen pressure and denotes the
tank contents were also nearly at atmospheric
pressure.

branch of R VVH on the downstream side of
regeneration gas cooler Pressure Safety Valve
(PSV). They also noticed that the PSV had
been removed and the open end of R VVH
branch line was not blinded. Around 00.00
hours on 3rd December, the operators went
to the control room and informed the plant
superintendent and the supervisor that there
was a MIC leak. They were advised to spray
The nitrogen pressure in the MIC storage water around the point of leakage.
tank is also utilised to transfer MIC from the
storage tank to the Sevin unit. As liquid maAt around 00.15 hours, when the control
terial is transferred, the gas pressure in the room operator was informed of the MIC leakage,
tank will show a gradual reduction. When the he observed on the Pressure Indicator (PI)
pressure in the tank drops to a considerably in the control room that the pressure in the
low value, the rate of transfer of MIC from tank 610 was shooting up and it was in the
the storage tank to the Sevin unit, would range of 25 - 30 psig.
become low. The tank would need to be pressurised again to a higher value by admitting
Between 00.15 and 00.30 hours, PI of
high purity nitrogen into the tank.
tank showed a reading beyond the maximum
of the scale, i.e. higher than 55 psig.
From 22nd October to 30th November,
tank 610 was under nearly atmospheric preThe control room operator went to the
ssure. No transfer of liquid MIC for Sevin storage area and heard a hissing sound from
manufacture took place from tank 610. During the Safety Relief Valve (SRV) downstream
that period MIC was being transferred from line, implying that SR V had popped off. He
tank 611 to the Sevin unit, whenever required. also noticed that the local temperature and
However, during the 30th November first pressure transmitters on the tank were indicatshift, there were some problems in the pre- ing beyond their ranges (i.e. +250 C and 55 psig).
ssurisation system of tank 611 and the pressure
could not be increased. Therefore, attempts
At this point, the operator rushed back to
were made to pressurise tank 610 and transfer the control room and started the vas circuMIC from that tank to the Sevin Unit, but lation pump from the control room. He, howeit could not be pressurised. In the meantime, ever, observed that the flow indicator in the
alternative system for pressurising tank 611 control room did not show any circulation of
was made and then it could be pressurised. the caustic soda solution through VGS. In the
Transfer of MIC to the Sevin unit was then meantime, a gaseous cloud was seen to be
continued from the tank 611.
coming out from the stack by the field operator. Reportedly, the siren was sounded around
In the second shift of 1st December (14.45 00.30 hours, and the plant personnel were
hours to 22.45 hours) attempts were made alerted about the MIC leakage.
once again to pressurise tank 610. However,
this could not be accomplished to any signiFrom around 01.00 hours, water was spraficant extent. No further efforts to pressurise yed on the MIC structure, but reportedly, it
tank 610 were made.
did not reach the top of the stack from where
the gases were coming out.
On 2nd December, the first leak of MIC
was noticed at 23.30 hours in the MIC structure
Around 03.00 hours, the SRV of tank &10
area (MIC production facility) near VGS. The is reported to have sat back and the gas also
operators on the ground level in this area ini- stopped coming out from the stack.
tially noticed some dirty water spilling from a
Gas that had escaped into the atmosphere
higher level in the MIC structure. They also
felt the presence of MIC in the atmosphere due got condensed in contact with the cold air
to irritation of their eyes. They went up the and due to atmospheric inversion phenomenon,
stairs in the MIC structure and noticed that settled down slowly on the ground. It then
MIC and dirty water were coming out of a evaporated and spread in the atmosphere gra47

