dually due to low wind velocity, thereby affecting the population greatly.
The escape of such a large quantity of
toxic material into the environment caused
all the tragic loss of life, serious damage and
disabilities to thousands of people. A part of
the population of Bhopal city also suffered
serious long-term effects which are still being
evaluated.
Local authorities, the State Gov~~nment
and the Government of India and their agencies
immediately reacted to this situation and
provided medical relief and other measures.
Medical personnel rushed to Bhopal from other
parts of the country and supplemented the
relentless efforts of local doctors and hospital
staff. Supplies of medicine, food, oxygen and
equipment were rushed to Bhopal. Disregarding potential risk and hazard from toxic material
in the area, many volunteered to reach Bhopal
and work there.
Within the Union Carbide Plant itself,
everyone moved upwind, away from the emission and toxic gas flow direction. Only one
person was affected to any extent and he
recovered. One operator in the neighbouring
oxygen/nitrogen factory unit died and others
in the unit have suffered seriously.

1.3

'Operation Faith'

Dr. S. Varadarajan, Director General (DG),
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR) and Secretary to the Government of
India, reached Bhopal on 5th December, 1984,
and was asked to coordinate all scientific efforts
at Bhopal in relation to the situation following
the leakage of toxic material. On his instructions, issued on 4th December, 1984, teams of
scientists and technologists with expertise in
environmental protection and toxicology for
examination of the environment, reached
Bhopal in the afternoon of 5th December,
1984 and assembled at the Regional Research
Laboratory of CSIR, at Bhopal.
The teams made an examination of the
environment immediately to ascertain if the
presence of any isocyante or other related
materials could be detected in air water, or
surfaces.
They also recorded observations
on any visible damages in the environment
such as changes in green plants, trees, aquatic

48

life in the lake and the condition of animal
and human population. Large number
of
people and animals had died by that time.
Very large numbers of persons had serious
irritation in eyes and breathing difficulties.
The tests carried out did not show any presence of MIC or related toxic materials in
the environment. Government
authorities
were advised accordingly. Public were advised
to wash all vegetables and food articles with
water and clean floors, walls and surfaces
with water. These tests, collection of material
and observations were continued in the next
fortnight. Facilities for detection of specific
toxic gaseous materials in a number of locations were established.
During the visit to the Union Carbide Plant
on the morning of 5th December, 1984, the
factory management provided Dr. Varadarajan
a brief account of the gas leakage, the nature
of facilities for storage of MIC and the associated controls. Visits to the MIC plant, storage
area, the Sevin plant and VGS were made. At
this stage, Dr. Varadarajan was informed that
bulk quantities of MIC were stored in tanks
E-610 and E-611 and the toxic gas leal~e
had taken place from tank E-610. It was estimated about 15 tonnes of MIC were present
in tank E-611. The material in both tal l~S was
from MIC production in October, 1984 and
part of the material had been transferred from
tank 610 to tank 611. It was also noted that
many pipeline systems for input into the three
tanks and output from these were connected
to common headers. It was realised that the
MIC in tank 611 could also lead at any time to
a further release of toxic gases and therefore
presented a serious potential hazard to large
population, remaining factory staff, visitors,
officials in the vicinity and to personnel providing relief and medical attention. They were
not aware of this further hazard and they had
no knowledge of the precautions to be observed
in the event of another toxic gas leakage. The
crisis warranted immediate measures and a new
crisis management system, for the following:
Estimating the probability of a further
leakage.
Analysis of circumstances that led to
the leakage on 2/3 December, 1984.
Devising means to prevent, if possible,
a leakage from tank 611.

