In the event of leakage occuring, precautions to be taken for minimising
the damage to those present in the
factory and to the public outside
through various measures, including
large scale evacaution of the population.

Safe disposal of the material in tank 611.
Outlining of precautions to be observed
within the factory and in the vicinity
of the factory to neutralise any toxic
gaseous material that might be emitted.
Provision of information to the Government authorities on steps to be taken
to minimise effects of such potential
toxic gases.
Provision of information on precautions
to be observed by the public in the
event of any gas leakage and quick
dissemination of warning, if an imminent leakage is indicated.
Provision of authentic information to
the press and public continuously to
avoid confusion and panic.
Reliable communication systems.
lvlobilisation of experienced scientists,
technologists for various actvities.
Institution and coordination of all
scientific efforts and establishment of
an organisation.
Collection of samples, data for current
needs and future studies on the nature
of injuries and damage to life systems
and environment, to allow for therapy,
rehabilitation.
The first task, on the morning of 5th December, 1984 at the factory of Union Carbide was
the estimation of probability of further leakage.
Material from production was fed from a
common MIC distillation unit directly, without
any intennediate day or shift storage into the
tanks 610 and 611 through a common pipeline.
Similarly, nitrogen from a common header was
supplied without storage through a pipeline
to the tanks. There was no reason to believe
that the hazard from material in tank 611 was
in any way different from that in tank 610.

The rapid rise in temperature and pressure
observed during the night of 2/3 December
from tank 610 and the inadequacy of vas
to contain large releases, confirmed that any
onset of reaction in material in tank 611 would
lead to a 'rapid explosive release of toxic gases
again and a repetition of the event of 2/3 December, 1984.
In the discussion on the morning of 5th
December, 1984, between Dr. Varadarajan &
Factory Management, it was conclued that MIC
can react with water and the heat generated by
reaction of about 40% of material would enable
evaporation and expelling of remaining MIC as
gas. About 1.5 to 2.5 tonnes of water would
have been involved in the reaction in tank 610.
Polymerisation or trimerisation of MIC could
be initiated by traces of metal ions. In such
an event, a third of the material undergoing
reaction could produce sufficient heat to expel
remaining material as gas. It was assumed at
that time, following generation of heat by
reaction with water or by catalysed polymeri-sation, temperature of liquid would rise to
800 C, the boiling point of MIC at 40 psig.
The pressure generated by gaseous MIC as well
as carbon dioxide, if any, would lead to a
rupture of the graphite disc (RD) and lifting
of the Safety Release Valve (SR V) and release of
gas. Depending on the rate of reaction, there
would be further release of gas. It was then
assumed that the
pipelines/ valves would
have permitted free flow of gases without
any obstruction through R VVH.
During further discussions on the evening
of 5th December, a uec brochure on MIC was
made available, and it was stated that while
pure MIC undergoes trimerisation, an exothermic reaction, without catalyst, commercial MIC
of UCC does not. Phosgene present in MIC at a
level of about 400 ppm acts as an inhibitor of
such polymerisation and a minimum of 200
ppm of phosgene was required to ensure stability against polymerisation. These levels were
prescribed by UCC in the· specifications for
control of quality of MIC. Phosgene was routinely estimated in MIC samples drawn from the
outlet of MIC distillation unit leading to the
MIC storage tanks. Such estimation of phosgene
content was also made on each occasion when
material from tanks was transferred to the
Sevin unit. Phosgene was estimated by methods
prescribed by uec. This involved the addition
of water to MIC, immediate liberation of hydro-

49

