gen chloride from phosgene and estimation of
the amount of hydrogen chloride by titration
with alkali. A further modification involved
addition of sodium iodide solution to MIC and
estimation of iodine liberation by titration
with sodium thiosulphate. The modified method
was used only when abnormally high values
for phosgene content were obtained.
These procedures were examined by Dr.
Varadarajan on the morning of 7th December,
1984. He concluded that water could react
readily with phosgene as well as methylcarbarnoyl chloride (MCC) present to give HCI.
In the method involving alkali titration, the
total of phosgene and MCC can be estimated.
Similarly, in the second method also, while
phosgene may liberate iodine quickly, the
HCI formed from MCC would also produce
hydrogen iodide and iodine by air oxidation.
It would not be possible to estimate phosgene
levels reliably by either procedure. This was
experimentally verified in the Factory on the
morning of 7th December, through estimations carried out by addition of specific
amounts of HCI to MIC. In discussions with
Factory Management, it was agreed that any
water entering the material stored in MIC
tanks, would react first with phosgene and
MCC, and produce HCI. Reaction of water
with MIC to produce Dimethyl Urea (DMU)
or Tri-Methyl Biuret (TMB) is much slower
than the reaction of water with phosgene or
MCC The relevant reactions are listed below:
COCI~ • H 0

2

CHJNHCOCI

The earlier appreciation was that 1.5 to
2.0 tonnes of water would have been required
to account for the reactions, in tank 610. These
fresh considerations on the role of water in
destroying quickly phosgene present as inhibitor, led to a hypothesis whereby small
amounts of water could lead to violent reactions. Since the tanks are buried and had material stored for a few years, without opportunities for cleaning or inspection, and since
nitrogen and MIC were fed in, without analysis
of quality of stored discreet batches, there may
be possibilities for ingress of tiny amounts of
metal or water, without being detected.
These necessitated urgent attention for the
safe disposal of the material in tank 611 and for
avoiding any ingress of small amounts of water
or metal particles such as iron rust into the tank
611.
The measures introduced included of the
following:

i.

-,.,>

....

Ultimate safe disposal of MIC

2HCI • CO2

ty> • CHJNCO •
•

HC.

CH)NH""'" CO • CO.
CH NH /
2
I

......-..~') CH]NH

)rCO

• cO 2

CH) NeONH CH)

From these, it appeared that relatively
small amounts of water of the order of a few
litres, entering 42 tonnes of MIC in tank 610,
would allow all the phosgene and MCC present
to react, giving HC!. Phosgene and MCC would
be totally absent or reduced to low level below
the minimum prescribed by Union Carbide to
act as inhibitor of polymerisation. With a
slight excess of water hydrochloric acid would
be available and this may react with the material
of the tank or with any small particle of metal
which may have been present. This would
produce ionisable metal chlorides. In the ab-

50

sence of the inhibitor, MIC could undergo
polymerisation rapidly. Hydrochloric acid and
metal chlorides may be expected to cataJ.yse a
violent and explosive polymerisation. The
heat produced at any point, in the absence
of inhibitor would promote a chain reaction,
leading to a very rapid increase in temperature,
vaporisation, increase in pressure and leakage
of gas.

To dispose MIC, four alternatives were considered. The first involved dumping liquid lV1IC
into large quantities of water in a contained
area near the factory. Such a facility could
not be located. The reaction with cold water
may take time and loss of vapour MIC into
the atmosphere may not be precluded and hence
this method was not practical and safe. The
second envisaged dilution of MIC with carbon
tetrachloride to act as a heat sink and subsequent feeding of the MIC carbon tetrachloride
mixture into aqueous alkali in VGS. Carbon
tetrachloride would settle in the bottom and
displace alkali solution causing alkali to overflow. This was not therefore proceeded with.
The third proposal was to feed liquid MIt;
into aqueous alkali in VGS. It was noted chloroform present in MIC would produce dichloro
carbenes with highly obnoxious odour, the
spread of which would create considerable

