panic in the city. While such a proced~e .wo';lld
be inevitable, in the event of any lndication
of onset of reaction and rise in temperature
in tank 611, this was not preferred. The fourth
method consisting of conversion of MIC to
Sevin by reaction with alpha-naphthol was
considered suitable, as staff were trained in
this operation and facilities were available.

should he established for any gases escaping
from the top level VGS outlet. Hence the top
of the stack open to atmosphere was cut and
new pipes were welded on so that the gas
outlet would be in a large cubical structure
surrounded by a wet cloth tent. Water was
sprayed on to this tent to ensure gaseous
material contact water. Helicopters and small
aircraft were mobilised and equipped to dump
Safeguards against entry of contaminants tonne quantities of water on to this outlet area.
ii.
Fire hydrant hoses were positioned to spray
A thorough system review of the plant and water. In the entire factory wall perimeter,
associated facilites was made. Instruments high level stands fitted with fixed cloth covers
were rechecked or replaced to ensure reliabi- were erected and the cloth kept wet so that
lity of measurement of temperature and pre- any leakage would pass on to the moist surssure. Except for certain lines needed for trans- face. Roads and areas outside the factory were
fer of MIC, others connected to common header also covered with water sprays.
were blinded at the first isolation valve from
the tank. The rupture disc was replaced. An iv.
Stabilisation of MIC
additional filtration system was introduced in
the nitrogen feed line to the tank to avoid The possibility of adding a quantity of phoscontaminants being carried in. Checks were gene into MIC in tank 611 was considered.
made on the quality of nitrogen supply from Phosgene cylinders were brought in from
the neigh houring factory. Scientists were in various sources and a purification system was
position in the nitrogen factory to ensure also established. However, since other steps
adequacy of supply and of quality. Operators made progress, this method was not pursued.
were posted to continuously monitor the
pressure in the tank. Positive higher pressure
would ensure contaminants would not enter v. Disposal of MIC
the tank.
Since the possibility of the material in tank
iii. Safeguards for containment in the event 611, undergoing reaction was noted, there
were suggestions, the material should be disof onset of reaction
posed off through reaction with alpha-naphthol
The number of personnel in the factory was and the processing should be started from 7th
reduced to a minimum. Entry into the surround- December, 1984. This was not accepted by Dr.
ing area was restricted. About 80,000 persons Varadarajan on the following grounds:
living in relatively open structures were evacuated to safe places. All educational institutions were closed. An alarm system was
established by the Government to alert the
public of any imminent leakage. The public
were advised to go into closed buildings when
an alert was sounded and use wet towels on
their faces to filter air for breathing.
Within the factory, the VGS was kept in
operation all the time. This was a departure
from earlier factory practice by which VGS
was shut down when MIC production stopped.
The flare system was also continuously operated
which was also a departure from earlier practice.
Adequate large alkali supplies were mobilised to meet needs of neutralisation. It was
realised that maximum contact with water

There was reason to believe the reactions
in tank 610 occured due to ingress of some
material, possibly small amounts of water
and metallic contaminants.

i.

ii.
There were common header lines
for the three tanks and they may contain
water or metal contaminants. Use of these
in some way may introduce contaminants
into tank 611 and thereby start a violent
reaction similar to those in tank 610.
It was necessary to examine all potential
sources for ingress of material and eliminate
them before taking actions to transfer MIC
from tank 611 for processing. Use of untested nitrogen without precautions might
lead to such reactions.

51

