The material in tank 611 had been
processed upto 2nd December, 1984 for
conversion to Sevin and the quality of the
material had been considered satisfactory.
There was no indication of instability in
tank 611 upto 7th December, 1984.
Ill.

iv.
Since the possibility of reaction
occuring in tank 611 existed, all steps
have to be taken to ensure minimum damage
as outlined earlier. Therefore, these steps
had to be given priority and had to be
completed before attempts to dispose off
MIC in tank 611. These included operation
of VGS, mobilisation of additional alkali
supplies, erection of water curtains around
the top gas outlet and around the factory
perimeter, evacaution of people around
the factory and those in open structures,
education of the public on precautions and
establishment of communication system and
risk management control organisation. Additional safety equipments such as air breathing packs and helmets had to be procured.
Water spray systems for extensive coverage
had to be brought to position.
v.
Processing of MIC required prechecking of all systems. In addition, chemicals such as alpha-naphthol, solvents and
alkali had to be brought from distant locations in the country in adequate quantities
and tested. Operators of Union Carbide and
of Nitrogen Factory had to be located and
brought back to function and given instruction and training to work under unusual
conditions and to deal with any untoward
emergencies. Reviews needed to be carried
out and a total strategy for disposal of
material had to be outlined. A large number
of personnel in and outside the factory had
to obtain full appreciation of all actions
to be taken under different circumstances
that may emerge.
Based on these, it was decided not to
embark on processing and disposal of MIC in
tank 611 from 7th December, 1984, and post-

52

pone such operations to a later date, after
all reviews, modifications and arrangements
had been completed. All concerned, after
full discussions, agreed with this approach.
For purposes of reaction of MIC with
alpha-naphthol, a complete detailed system
of organisation and review was established.
Samples of alpha-naphthol and solvents were
brought in. All systems were thoroughly checked and detailed written procedures were issued.
Wireless communication systems were established for constant contact with control
cells in the Factory and at the State Secretariat. Special communication tele-links and
hot-lines with Delhi and other centres enabled
the mobilisation of materials, equipment,
personnel. A number of senior scientists and
technologists from research organisations and
major chemical manufacturing units were
involved in review and checks and control
of operations. Senior most officials of the
Government of India and the Madhya Pradesh
Government provided facilities and assistance
for all these activities, and helped to restore
calm and order in an environment, which exhibited constantly the acute distress of suffering
of thousands of citizens. These measures motivated the staff of factories, transporters, pu blic
utilities and services to take up work in public
interest within the potentially hazardous areas.
The processing of MIC was termed 'Operation Faith' by the Chief Minister of the State,
Shri Arjun Singh. The proposal to start such
an operation was made public three days in
advance, together with information on precautions to be observed. Radio and television
were fully used for such communications. The
Operation Faith started on the morning of
Sunday the 16th December, 1984. A total of
21 tonnes of MIC in tank 611, one tonne from
tank 619 and material from a number of stainless steel drums were reacted in one tonne lots
with alpha-naphthol at the rate of three to four
tonnes each day. The factory was made virtually free of all MIC. Operation Faith ended
on 22nd December, 1984, successfully.

