2.0 EXAMINATION OF TANK 610 AND ITS CONTENTS

In order to have an appreciation- of the event,
it was necessary to examine the tank, its associated piping and valves, samples of materials
that collected in the pipelines and valves, and
finally the residue remaining in tank 610.

2.1.

Sampling

2.1.1. Core samples from the manhole nozzle:
All the five nozzles located on the manhole
cover were opened one after another and core
samples were drawn (see Figure 2.1). A pipe
section was mechanically forced inside the
residue till it reached the bottom of the tank.
The residue entering the pipe was pushed out
by using a closely fitting pusher rod inside
the pipe. The samples thus pushed out of the
pipe section formed a cylindrical semi-solid
mass.. Each sample was divided longitudinally
into 4 portions with the bottom material in
contact with the vessel was receiving identification number 1 of the respective series.
Similarly, alphabets A to E were used for
identifying the samples from different nozzles
(see Figure 2.1).

On December 20, 1984, the line attached to
the safety relief valve was disconnected and it
was noted that the rupture disc
which had
broken had some solid material collected around
it. A sample of this solid was collected from
the rupture disc downstream of the spool piece
and analysed. It was found to be essentially
pure MIC trimer (MICT) which must have
sublimed from the tank and collected there.
Samples were also collected from the tank
bottom using a stainless steel pipe and a drill
core through the safety valve nozzle, and analysed. In February 1985, it was planned to take
additional residue samples for further analysis.
The tank was at an absolute pressure of 160
mm Hg. Nitrogen was first admitted to the
tank to bring the pressure to normal level be- 2.1.2. Samples from tank residue after openfore opening the nozzles. All the 5 nozzles
ing the tank:
located on the manhole cover were opened
one after another and the core samples with- Samples from various locations inside the
drawn. This set of samples was also analysed. tank were collected after cutting windows
on the body of the tank. Various sampling
During March 1985, the concrete mound points and windows on the body are presentover the tank, which had already cracked ed in Figure 2.2. After cutting windows on
during the event, was removed and excava- the body of the tank, the inside of the tank
tion work around the tank completed to pro- was photographed. One of the important obvide access to and enable inspection of the servations made during the opening of the
external wall of the tank.
windows was a very strong smell of amines.
Four sets of samples were taken from each
It was decided to cut windows at specific window. Samples were collected using a 5 em
points on the tank wall and examine the metal dia. stainless steel pipe section and divided
as well as samples of the residue throughout into 4 equal parts as described in 2.1.1. Each
the length of the tank. In April 1985, tank 610 sample was properly marked and coded. For
was evacuated first and then purged with nitro- example, a sample marked 8-H-1 represents
gen to remove volatiles and minimise odour. the bottom cross-section of the residue from
Plates were then cut at predetermined points window 'C' collected on 8th April. The time
and through these window holes samples of and date of sampling were also marked on the
the residue were removed for analysis. Pieces sample bottle tags. The tank residue was found
of the metal plates were also subjected to to be about 52 cm deep.
physical and chemical analysis.

