2.1.3. Samples from pipelines:

2.2

Chemical Analysis

Liquid samples were collected from RVVH/PVH 2.2.1 Physical appearance of samples of
in the February, 1985 and May, 1985. Descripresidue:
tion of these samples along with their analyses
All the samples from tank 610 were thick,
is given in Table 2.1.
semi-solid in consistency, and brownish in
colour. The samples tended to absorb moisture
2.1.4. MICsamplesfrom tank 611:
on exposure to air and had the smell of amines.
The consistency of the bottom portion was
MIC was stored in 3 storage tanks in the Union quite different from that of the top. The top
Carbide factory. The tanks are designated portion of the residue appeared to be dark
E-610, E-611 and E-619. During the night of brown and WQS more hygroscopic and liquidDecember 2-3, 1984, the mishap occurred in like in nature. The bottom portion appeared
tank E-610. Tank 611 still contained large to consist of a high percentage of crysta))ine
quantities of MIC.
compound and was light in colour.
The samples of MIC from tank 611 had 2.2.2. Solubility Characteristics:
been collected in 200 ml capacity pressure
bottles closed by spring-loaded ball valves. The solubility characteristics of the samples
Each bottle contained about 125 to 150 ml of were studied initially for developing the analyMIC. The samples were then analysed for tical methods. Chloroform and acetone dissolspecification tests. The MIC in tank 611 was ved 70 to 85% of the samples. Hot toluene
as per the required specification and the data also dissolved a major portion of the samples.
On cooling the toluene extracts, crystals seare given in Table 2.2.
parated and were identified as dimethylisocyanuric acid. Water was also found to dissolve
the sample, but complete dissolution required
2.1.5. Metal pieces cut from Tank 610:
large quantities of water.
In April 1985, a team of experts examined
the tank. The surface was found to be coated 2.2.3. QJ.4alitative Analysis:
with bitumen with nylon fibre reinforcements.
The bituminous layer was removed smd exaSmell: The samples showed a strong
mined. The tank had six numbers of steel
emell of amines.
stiffening rings welded all around. The tank
had bulged significantly between the stiffening
Acidity or alkalinity: The samples were
rings. The nature of the bulges indicated high
.highly acidic.
internal pressures.
Thin-layer chromatography • (TLC):
Several pieCes were cut out from tank 610.
TLC carried out on silica gel indicated
The locations are shown in Figure 2.2. A round
the presence of about 15 compounds.
piece of metal (28 cm diameter) was cut out
These were later identified by spotting
from the dished end away from the manhole
standard compounds on the TLC plates.
(WA). Square pieces were cut out from locations
WB, WC, WD and WE. All metal pieces were
Chloride ions: Residue samples indiphotographed. Physical examination of the
cated positive tests for chloride ions.
pieces showed a blackish coating on the inside
surface. The metal pieces cut out from the
Metal ions: The residue after treatment with
sides nearer to the residue levels showed depohydrochloric acid was tested for metal ions.
sits due to sublimation. The top portion of the
Positive tests were obtained for the following
tank (inside) showed only thin blackish deposits
metallic ions: iron, nickel, chromium and
or sublimates. Examination through a microscope indicated crystals in the deposits. Metal molybdenum.
pieces cut out from the sides or lower portions
of the tank showed comparatively higher Gyanide ions: Residue samples showed negative tests for cyanide ions.
amounts of deposits.

56

