2.2.4. Analytical Procedures:
Different techniques were employed for the
quantitative estimation of compounds in the
samples. The organic compounds were determined by gas liquid chromatography (GLC).
Except for the amines, all the organic compounds could be well separated on FF AP
column or other column as detailed in
Annexure 2. Acetone was used as the solvent
for the analysis. It was found that acetone in
presence of dimethyl-amine (2%) dissolved
about 95% of the residue. The acetone insoluble (approximately 3-6%) showed metal
chlorides (approximately 1%). It did not contain
amines or other identified organic compounds.
The amines could be separated using a TEPA+
KOH column on chromosorb 102. Most of the
compounds were isolated from the residue
using various techniques and their identity
established by spectral data (IR, NMR and MS)
by direct comparison with those of pure compounds. The acid present in the samples and the
chloride '~ere determined by potentiometric
titration.
Metallic ions as iron, chromium, nickel,
calcium and magnesium were determined by
atomic absorption and sodium by flame photometry.
Moisture contents In the samples were
determined by Karl-Fischer titration.
• Accuracy and reproducibility of analysis
were established by using standard mixtures
prepared from pure compounds.

2.2.5. Analytical Results:

11. Chloride
12. Metallic ions (Fe, Cr, Ni, Mo, Na, Ca,
Mg)
The analytical results are summarised in
Tables, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8.
2.3.

'Total representative' sample of residue
and its analysis:

A total representative sample was prepared by
mixing samples drawn from the various windows
of the tank. The sample thus prepared as representative of the entire quantity of the residue
was mixed and homogenised. This sample was
prepared by mixing equal quantities from 22
different residue samples. These samples represent the bottom portions, middle portions
and top portions at different axial positions
along the 40 feet long storage tank. Two such
samples were prepared initially, each of which
was divided into 2 portions. These were then
cross-mixed to provide two representative
samples.
Total analysis was carried out on this sample
and the analytical results were used to calculate
various factors relating to the 'event'. The analytical procedures adopted were the same as described earlier. The results of the analysis are presented in Table 2.9.
The total identified compounds in the
sample add up to about 95%. As indicated earlier, the residue sample contain about 3-6% of
unidentified tarry materials.

2.3.1. Product distribution:

The following compounds were identified in Besides the presence of various metal and
the residue samples taken from various locations chloride ions, the residue contains 10 organic
in tank 610. The chemical structures of the first compounds. These are presented as kg moles
in the last column of Table 2.9. The tank
seven compounds are given in Figure 2.3.
re~idue contains 40.7 kg moles (or about 7000
kg of MIC trimer). The next highest molar
1. Methylisocyanate trimer (MICT)
concentration is that of DMI with 17.0 kg moles
2. Dimethylisocyanurate (DMI)
(2675 kg) followed by the chloride ions with
3. Dimethyl urea (DMU)
a concentration of 15.2 kg moles (540 kg).
4. Trimethyl urea (TMU)
All the aroines taken together add up to 16.9
5. Dione
kg moles in the residue (800 kg). In all, a total
6. Trimethyl biuret (TMB)
of 97 kg moles of compounds are present in
7. Tetramethyl biuret (TRMB)
the residue, accounting for about 12 tonnes
8. Monomethyl amine (MMA)
out of the 12.5 tonnes of the residue estimated
9. Dimethyl amine (DMA)
to be present.
10. Trimethyl amine (TMA)

57

