A ""exlI re 2.1

Gas liquid chromatography (GLC)
The first ten compounds of the tank residue
listed under 2.2.5 were estimated by GLC.
Various columns were investigated for separation and quantitative estimation. The following three columns were found suitable for the
separation of first seven compounds and their
quantitative estimation. The procedure used
for determination of amines is described separately.

1. FF AP - 3 - 10%
2. OV-210
3.

t OV-17 - 3-5%

Carbowax 20 M TPA - 5-7%

Variation in the load of the phase helps
in eluting all the components in shorter time.
Detennination
Urea

of MICT,

DMI, Dione and

external standard methods was the detennination of standard deviation for each standard
compound. The results of reliaoility tests using
internal standard are recorded in the Tables
A-2.3, A-2.4 and A-2.5.
All the values obtained by using different
methods are within the acceptable range for
GLC analysis.
Standard solutions:
The standard solution of each compound was
prepared by using purified compounds, with
a concentration to match the quantity of that
compound actually present in the samples. All
the standard compounds (synthesised or isolated) were characterised by their spectral
data. Acetone was used as a solvent for preparing the solutions. Standard solutions of
various concentrations of each compound were
prepared to match the peaks of the sample
matrix.

Sample preparation:

Instruments and chromatographic condItions:

About 3g of the sample was weighed in a 100
ml beaker and repeatedly extracted with acetone containing 2% dimethylamine. The extraction was repeated four times with 15 ml portions of the acetone containing dimethylamine.
Dimethylamine ensures the dissolution of all
the organic compounds excepting the tarry
compounds in the sample. The extracts were
made up to 100 ml and the solution (0.4 J I)
was injected into the GLe. About 3 to 6%lOf
tarry residue remained undissolved. Only metal
:!hlorides (0.8%) could be identified in the
insoluble residue. The results were calculated
oy the reporting integrator. The accuracy of
the results was checked by injecting known
;amples into the GLe.

The following three instruments were used
for the gas chromatographic analysis.

1.

Shimadzu gas
coupled with

chromatograph
RIA
reporting
integrator

GLC conditions:
Column - FFAP 10% on chromosorb
WAW (SS column of 1/8" ID x 6')
Detector - Flame Ionisation Detector
(FlO)
Carrier gas - nitrogen (60 ml/min)
Column oven temperature - lSOoC

In the case of analysis done using internal
;tandard quantitation, concentration of interlal standard was kept constant for standards
is well as samples.
The reliability and reproducibility of the
nethods were checked by analysing known
;tandard samples. The results obtained by
tbsolute calibration curve method are tabulat!d in Table 2.9. Reliability test used for the

66

Injection port temperature - 250 0 C
Detector temperature - 250 0 C
Injection volume · 0.4f-l
Total analysis time - 43 min.
Quantitation method - absolute calibration curve method 44.

