Instrument and chromatographic conditions
Shimadzu Gas Chromatograph RIA coupled
with the reporting integrator was used for
all chromatographic estimations. The performance of the chromatograph was checked
periodically by injecting standard mixtures.

GLC conditions
Column - 8% TEPA + 2% KOH on chromosorb 102 (SS column of 1/8" ID x 6
feet)
Detector - Flame Ionisation Detector(FID)
Carrier gas - nitrogen (50 ml/min)
Column oven temperature - 850 C
Injection port temperature - 1500 C
Detector temperature - 2250 C
Total analysis time - 15 min
Quantitation method - Absolute calibration
curve method 44
Determination of Chlorides by Potentiometric
Titration
Chloride content (CI-) was determined by
titrating against standard silver nitrate solution potentiometrically. Residue samples from
tank 610 as well as other samples were determined by this procedure. All the samples after
diluting with water were made acidic with dilute
nitric acid before titration.

A magnetic stirrer was used for stirring the
solutions during titrations. The end point of
the titration was determined by plotting m V
against volume of standard AgNOa added. The
end point potential was set at + 300 mV.
Procedure
About 0.5 to 1 g of a sample was accurately
weighed using a Sartorius Balance. The weighed
sample was transferred into a 250 ml beaker
and diluted to about 80 ml with distilled water.
The solution was made acidic by adding 5 ml
of 1:3 dilute nitric acid. The chloride ion
selective electrode and the reference electrode
(D/J reference electrode with sodium nitrate
in the outer compartment) were introduced
into the solution and kept on the magnetic
stirrer. A Teflon coated magnetic needle was
used as the stirring bar. The electrodes were
connected to the automatic titrator. The end
point of the titrator was set at + 300 m V.
Before starting the titration, the solution was
stirred well to ensure that all the chlorides
are dissolved in the solution. The stirring was
continued throughout the titration. The burette
addition automatically stopped when the
potential reached + 300 m V. The volume of
silver nitrate solution added was noted down
after the titration was over.
The chloride content in the sample was
calculated by using the equation:
1 ml of O.1N AgN03

= 8.55 mg cr

Preparation of Standard Compounds
Trimethyl Urea

Reagents and Apparatus
A R Grade reagents were used for all the

work.
1. 0.1 N silver nitrate was prepared by dissolving 85 g of silver nitrate in 5 litres of deionised-distilled water. The solution was
standardised using sodium chloride-as
standard.
2. Mettler automatic titrator was used for
all the titrations. ORION CHLORIDE
ion selective electrode along with a double
junction reference electrode was used as
the indicator electrode system.

NN - Dimethylamine in ether was treated with
MIC in ether at 0-5 0 C. The product was isolat-

ed after keeping the reaction mixture under
stirring overnight. The reaction mixt,ure was
filtered and washed with ether. A colourless
crystalline product was obtained in quantitative yield.
1,3,5 Trimethyl Biuret
MIC and sym-dimethyl urea (dry) were heated

at 100°C in s.s. bomb for 2 hr. The reaction
mixture was felt at room temperature evernight.
The following day the reactor was opened and
the excess MIC was evaporated by keeping the
71

