3.0

CHEMISTRY OF FORMATION OF
COMPOUNDS IN TANK 610

Having established the presence of the comSummaries of a few representative experipounds described in Section 2 and listed in ments are given in Table 3.1. Experimental
2.2.5 in the residue in tank 610, it was procedures along with details of laboratory
desirable to find conditions and circumstances experiments (Table
A-a.1) are given in
leading to the formation of each chemical Annexure 3.1.
entity. It also became necessary to gain some
Observations:
understanding of the complex chemistry of 3.2
the reactions that occurred and the various
plausible routes by which the products found Based on the above mentioned experiments, the
could have been formed.
following observations were made:

3.1

Experiments:

MIC reacts with small quantities of
water slowly at room temperature,
with a half life of 3 to 4 hours.

ti.

Addition of a trace of ferric chloride
to the above reaction mixture at room
temperature results in a vigorous reaction after an induction period.

iii.

DMU and TMB are readily formed by
reaction of MIC with water.

iv.

Since simulation of the exact conditions of
the total event that occurred in tank 610 was
not possible, experiments were carried out by
taking small quantities of MIC and subjecting
them to different reaction conditions. The
MIC used for these experiments was from
material collected from tank 611 from the
Bhopal plant. Its composition is given in Table
2.2. It contained CHel3 and hydrolysable
chlorides.

i.

MICT is formed readily from MIC.
(Presence of MICT has also been noted
in various parts of the plant). It can
also be formed from TMB by beating.
It is very stable product and is not
easily transformed into other products.

v.

The formation of DMI is not noticed
below 200 0 C. TMB alone on heating
to temperatures above 2000C also
gives DMI.

vi.

Dione formation was noticed only
above 220 0 C and the quantity increase
as the temperature is raised.

vii.

Presence of chloroform is considered
necessary for the formation of Dione.

viii.

It appears that part of the chloride
present has come from chloroform
present in MIC when the reaction
temperatures exceed 20Qo C.

Two sets of experiments were carried out:
a) In the first set, a few experiments were
done with MIC which was taken in
loosely stoppered pyrex tubes essentially at atmospheric pressure, and
reacted with different reagents.
b) In the second set of reactions, MIC
and/or its derivatives, with or without
reagents, was taken in stainless steel
containers, sealed and heated to and
maintained at different temperatures
for predetermined times. After cooling,
the seal was broken and the residue
was examined. Gaseous products have
not been examined in these experiments. Further work will be done to
identify and estimate the gaseous products as well.

73

