3.4

Comments

The residue contains iron, chromium and
nickel, ahnost in the same ratio as in stainless steel 304/316. This could be due to corrosion of the material due to the hydrochloric
acid produced as envisaged in the reactions
mentioned earlier.
Sodium is present in the residue to the
extent of 50-90 ppm. The process water contains only 15 ppm sodium. If all the sodium
in the residue is to be accounted from process
water only, it had to enter the tank in enonnous
quantity. Hence one has to look for other
sources of sodium e.g. alkali solution in the
VGS.
The cause of the presence of 20-30 ppm
calcium and of 2 ppm magnesium in the residue,
is being investigated.
The exploratory laboratory experiments
carried out so far provide sufficient information
to enable a logical and plausible scenario to be
developed for the chemical reactions that
occured in taDk 610.
3.5

Gaseous Products of Reaction of MIC

In the above set of experiments on the chemical
transformation of MIC under different conditions and the analysis of the residue, it was not
possible to collect gaseous products and examine
them. Facilities for such collection of. gaseous
material are being established.

detected.
The behaviour of MIC prepared by a different route, namely from sodium azide and
acetyl chloride has been studied. When heated
in sealed glass tubes to 3000 e and the contents
examined, the presence of hydrogen cyanide
in small amounts has been noted. Under the
same conditions, it has been found that MIC
sample from tank 611 does not yield hydrogen
cyanide. It was felt that the chlorofonn present
in the samples from tank ~11 may have an
influence on thermal degradation, Therefore,
small amounts of chloroform were added to
the chloroform free MIC made through sodium
azide and acetyl chloride route and the material
was heated. In this case, hydrogen cyanide
could not be detected. It appears chloroform
inhibits the break down of MIC prepared by the
sodium azide-acetyl chloride route may act
as activators for formation of hydrogen cyanide.
For such studies on inhibitors and activators,
highly purified MIC is required. It is found
that highly purified MIC tends to polymerise
very readily at room temperature. By suitable
storage, it is proposed to keep highly purified
MIC non polymerised and then examine the
influence of minor additives to MIC on thermal
decomposition at high temperature.

lVlIeT, DMI, Dione, DMU and TMB are all
products found in the residue in tank 610. It
has been estimated by detailed calculation that
about 500 kg. of water which had entered the
tank, would have reacted with MIC before the
temperature rose to 1500 C. At temperatures
above 200 0 C, the five materials listed would be
In preliminary experiments, MIC, water in the main products and the possibility of these
and ferric chloride were placed in a stainless producing hydrogen cyanide at further higher
steel tube as described under Annexure 3.1. temperature has been examined. Weighted
The tube was closed with cap to which was amounts (100-150 mg) of each material in
attached a pressure valve and a thin pipe. The sealed glass vials have been heated for half an
valve was closed and the tube heated to 300 0 C hour at aoooc, the cooled vial placed under
and maintained at the temperature for
half an dilute alkali in standard flasks and the seal
o
hour. The tube was then cooled to -5C and the broken to release material. The solution made
end of the pipe was placed in a known quantity upto 100 ml was analysed for cyanide by
of dilute aqueous alkali. The valve was opened standard procedures. Only traces could be
and the tube and contents were warmed up to detected in some cases. Thus, there seems to
800 C,to volatilise gases and low boiling ma- be little or no formation of cyanide from
terials. The gaseous products were thus trapped these five materials even in the absence of
in the dilute aqueous alkali. The aqueous alkali chloroform. Further detailed work on behaviour
was examined for the presence of cyanide by at higher temperatures and on influence of
standard APHA methods. Cyanide was not other components.is planned.

76

