4.0 ANALYSIS OF DESIGN AND ENGINEERING FEATURES

4.1

MIC and its Characteristics:

that reacts with MIC or catalyses the reactions.
While chloroform is an example of a safe
coolant, use of water does create a hazard.

MIC is a highly reactive, toxic, volatile and inflammable chell.1ical. According to the VCC
Storage Tank
brochure, MIC is usually stored and handled in 4.2
stainless steel 304 and 316 equipment. Iron or
steel, aluminium, zinc or galvanized iron, tin, The highly toxic and explosive nature of MIC
copper or their alloys are prohibited from use. requires that the storage system and its related
instrumentation/control be of high reliability.
Purified MIC will react with itself under the
Inspection of MIC storage tanks is diffiinfluence of a catalyst to form a cyclic trimer
or a high molecular weight polymer. Strong cult, since they are buried. Tank 610 was
bases such as sodium hydroxide, sodium metho- reportedly cleaned and inspected in 1982.
xide and sodium acetate, certain metal chlorides Varying quantities of MIC from production
such as ferric chloride and stannic chloride cata.- runs at different periods have been filled into
lyse trimerisation. Since the reaction is quite tank 610. Similarly, varying quantities of MIC
exothermic, contamination of MIC with traces have been removed at different periods.
of the catalysts can cause violent reactions.
Commercially produced
MIC
contains
Highly purified MIC will polymerise spon- hydrolysable chloride in the form of phosgene
and MCC. Ingress of even a small quantity of
taneously to a linear polymer/trimer.
water of the order of 40-50 ml per tonne of
Water reacts exothermically to produce MIC, will lead to the reaction of water with
heat and carbon dioxide. As a result, the tank the hydrolysable chloride to provide hydrogen
pressure will rise rapidly if MIC is contaminated chloride and with a little more of water, aqueous
with water. The reaction may begin slowly, hydrochloric acid. This leads to corrosion of
especially if there is no agitation, but it will stainless steel, the material of construction of
become violent. Aqueous sodium hydroxide the storage tank, leading to the formation of
solution will react with MIC quite rapidly. ferric chloride which can catalyse the violent
run-away reaction.
MIC with the above mentioned characteThe Sevin unit could process MIC of the
ristics should be considered as an explosive
in addition to it begin a highly toxic chemical. order of 3 to 4 tonnes per day. The inventory
of MIC in the storage tank was of the order of
As per the UCC brochure, the storage tem- 90 tannes, equivalent to nearly 30 days properature should be maintained below 150 C and duction.
preferably at about OOC. The storage tank is to
It is normal plant practice to have interbe equipped with dual temperature indicators
that will sound an alarm and flash warning mediate batch tanks to hold production from
lights if the temperature of the stored material a single shift or for a day. The product collectrises abnormally. The tendency of valves on ed in these tanks is analysed, its quality ensured
storage tanks to be clogged with solids is also and then it is transferred to the bulk storage
tank. Such a facility of batch tanks had not
stated in the brochure.
been provided. MIC was directly fed to the
The brochure further states that the cooling bulk storage tanks from MRS without any
medium in the heat exchanger should not be one batch tank.

85

