Alternatively, an online analyser could
have monitored continuously the quality of
MIC before it entered the storage tank. An
alarm could have been provided to alert the
operator regarding off-quality MIC and enable
him to take quick action to prevent contamination of the bulk storage tank with off-quality
material. There was no provision for such an
online analyser/alarm system.
Water is used as the cooling medium in the
multi-tubular MRS overhead condenser. Water
circulated in the shell side is at a higher pressure than the pressure of MIC inside the tubes.
Even a pin hole in any of the tubes could lead
to a small quantity of water entering the MIC
make line which is taken directly to the bulk
storage tank.
4.3

Nitrogen:

MIC is kept under a pressure of nitrogen which
is supplied by a carbon steel header common to
all the storage tanks. There is a strainer in the
nitrogen line. Subsequent to the strainer the
pipe is of carbon steel and leads to make-up
DMV which also has a body of carbon steel.
Similarly, the blowdown DMV is also of carbon
steel body. These carbon steel parts may be
exposed to MIC vapours and get corroded,
providing a source of contaminant which can
enter the MIC storage tank.
The level in MIC' tank is measured by purging of nitrogen. The header supplying this
nitrogen is made of carbon steel and the connection from the manifold to the level instrument
is by a copper tube. There is no strainer or
filter in this line which can prevent entry of
rust or metallic particle entering the tank
along with nitrogen.
4.4

Instrumentation and Control System:

The pressure in the MIC tank increases rapidly
if MIC is contaminated with water. There is
no high pressure alarm to alert the operator
about the build-up of pressure.
There is a graphite rupture disc between
the tank and the safety valve. This graphite
rupture disc may break becauge of pressure
surges even under normal conditions. There
is no provision for an alarm to bring such a
breakage of rupture disc to the attention of
the operator.

86

For the storage of a lethal chemical such as
MIC, two instruments in parallel ( one for
control/indication and another for alarm) are
normally provided. No such provision is made.
For example, quite often the level readings
have not been recorded, reportedly because
the level system used to be out of order very
often due to choking problems. In fact, after
the event, since the only level monitoring
system provided for tank 611 was not functioning, it was not possible to ascertain the
exact quantity of MIC in that tank. An additional level measuring system would have
helped in such a situation.
Ingress of contaminants or water can start
a reaction with MIC which will begin slowly
and produce a rise in temperature of the tank
contents. However, the range of the temperature
transmitter provided was only -250 C to +25 0 C,
with a high alarm setting at +11 o C. The contents
of the tank were being stored at ambient temperature, which varies approximately from
+150 C to +40o C at Bhopal. The temperature
of MIC in the storage tanks for most part of
the year was higher than the high temperature
alarm setting, i.e. +11 o C. Indeed the temperature of material in the tank was higher than
the maximum of the range of the temperature
transmitter, i.e. +250 C. In such circumstances
the actual temperature was not known and the
transmitter was of no value. Further, provision
of "rate of rise in temperature" alarm would
have invited the operator's attention to the
start of such a reaction. No such provision was
made.
4.5

Refrigeration

There is only one common compressor and
chiller system for all the three MIC storage
tanks. For such a hazardous material as MIC ,
where maintaining it at a low temperature is
considered very important, a spare compressor
and chiller system would have ensured proper
chilling even when the main compressor and
chiller system is under repairs or maintenance.
The provision of spare compressor and chiller
has not been made.
4.6

Vent Gas Scrubber

The VGS is designed to neutralise a maximum
of about 3.5 tonnes (7700 Ib) of MIC at a
maximum rate of about 9.6 tonne/hr (21200
lb/hr) in a vapour form.

