5.0

AN ANALYSIS OF THE EVENT

The background and circumstances, the study
of the properties of the materials, examination
of tank residue, experiments on conditions for
formation of various chemical entities, critical
examination of relevant features of design have
all been ~escribed in the previous chapters.
This provides a basis for outlining factors which
led to the event, which are given in the following
paragraphs:
MIC readily undergoes chemical reactions
with explosive violence, which produce a
large amount of heat, and allow a large
portion of stored liquid MIC to vapourise.
This is inherent to the nature of the material. Neither the precise conditions Wider
which such run-away reactions could be
initiated in MIC nor its manner of prevention are well known.
A large quantity of MIC was stored in
underground tanks which have many inlets
and outlets that can permit entry of contaminants which can trigger off explosive
reactions.
The studies described earlier indicate that
a reaction was initiated and the temperature rose rapidly. There was no 'rate of
rise in temperature' alarm to indicate the
rising temperature which would have alerted
the operator to an early detection of a
run-away reaction.
Any emergency dumping of liquid MIC
into the VGS would not have been feasible
because the alkali available in the accumulator is grossly insufficient. Further more,
this would also lead to an abnormal temperature rise in the VGS.
It is conceivable that gaseous MIC would
be emitted due to a rapid reaction inside
the tank. This gas is expected to be neutralised by circulating alkali solution in the
packed section of VGS. This system is also

grossly inadequate to handle quantities of
vapourised IvIIC as large as were emitted
during the event. Calculations show that
even if the normal design load for VGS is
taken into consideration, the VGS is inadequate to neutralise a discharge of 28
tonnes of vapourised MIC in about 2 hours.
Therefore, neither ~he liquid nor the gaseous
disposal system was capable of handling
the event which occurred on the night of
December 2, 1984.
The relief valve design could not permit
free flow of large quantities of gases, certainly at the level at which they were generated during the event. Thus, the tank
contents were subjected to pressures much
higher than 40 psig and correspondingly
high temperature.
From the examination of the tank residue
and from the conditions of formation of
the residue, it is surmised that the temperature reached in the bulk storage tank
may have been around 250 0 C. The total
energy balance on the tank also indicate
that the probable temperatures would
be in the range of 200 to 250 0 C. Information from the mechanical examination
of the tank indicate that the pressure may
have reached 11 to 13 kg/cm 2g with the
corresponding temperatures in the range
of 200 to 3500 C.
The chemical analysis of the tank residue
clearly shows the evidence of entry of
approximately 500 kg. (1100 lb) of water.
The fact that the tank 610 was not under
pressure of nitrogen for approximately
two months prior to the accident also
indicates that conditions existed for entry
of contaminants such as metallic impurities through the high pressure nitrogen
line. As emphasised earlier, many such
impurities have a catalytic effect on the
possible reactions MIC can undergo.

89

