The hydrolysis of MIC with about 500 kg.
(1100 lb) of water by itself and in the
absence of other contaminants is not expected to lead to thermal run-away conditions. The presence of this quantity of
water would have possibly resulted in
reaction with about three to four tonnes
of MIC, generation of carbon dioxide,
breaking of the rupture disc and release
of C02.
The temperature of the tank
content would have gradually risen to
about 60-70 o C, below the boiling point
of MIC at that pressure. It is surmised that
no more than 50 to 100 kg/hr (110-220
lb/hr) of C02 along with small quantities
of MIC, Ca 100-150 kg/hr (220 - 330 Ib/hr)
would have been released. Such emissions
will cease once the water has been consumed.
The presence of trace amount of metallic
contaminants derived from the material
of the tank or its attachments or from
extraneous sources, may not necessarily
initiate a violent reaction under dry conditions. Small amounts of local trimerisation
may take place, as noticed throughout
the pipelines and plant. However, the
ingress of water, would provide for active
species of initiator to be generated and
distributed in the liquid.

500 kg (1100 lb) of water could have entered the tank 610 either from the MRS
condenser (through condenser tube leaks)
or through RVVH/PVH lines. The fact
that about 50-90 ppm of sodium was found
in the tank residues is also significant. The
observed sodium levels are substantially
higher than what would have normally
been present due to the entry of 500 Kg
(1100 lb) of water (below 0.5 ppm).
-

Entry of water from the MRS condenser
appears less likely as the MRS make line
from MRS condenser to tank 610 was
flushed with nitrogen, evacuated and blinds
were inserted in the line between 23 to 25
October, 1984. Water could have entered
from the MRS prior to 23 October but it
would have probably reacted much earlier
than 2 December, 1984.

-

A detailed analysis indicates that water
entry through RVVH/PVH lines is quite
likely. It has been reported that around
9.30 P.M. on 2 December, 1984, an operator
was clearing a possible choke of the R VVH
lines downstream of phosgene stripping
still filters by water flushing. Presumably
the 6" isolation valve on the R VVH was
closed but a slip blind had not been inserted. Under these conditions when the
filter lines are choked, water could enter
into the RVVH, if the 6" isolation valve
had not been tightly shut or passing.

This implies that conditions which were
ripe for the initiation of a run-away trimerisation reaction already existed in
tank 610 on the day of the event, and that entry of water would generate active
initiators and the hydrolysis of MIC would
provide the necessary heat also for the
trimerisation reaction to take off with
explosive violence.
The
carbondioxide
evolved upon hydrolysis would provide
the necessary mixing leading to even more
rapid chemical reactions. The storage tank
thus equalled the conditions of a well mixed tank reactor, supplied with heat.
Once initiated, the trimerisation reaction
rapidly led to a temperature increase leading
to levels as high as 250 0 C with autocatalytic
and auto-thermal features. At these high
temperatures, secondary chemical transfor- mation occured leading to the complex
mixture of products actUally found in the
tank 610 residue.

90

Furthermore, it is likely that alkaline water
could have backed up from the VGS accumulator into the RVVH and PVH under
certain conditions. Indeed, several litres
of alkaline water was drained from the
R VVH/PVH lines in the MIC structure
in May 1985, lending credence to such a
possibility.
Furthermore, RVVH/PVH lines are made
of carbon steel. Back up water or alkali
through these lines increase the possibility
of metal contaminants entering the tank,
especially in the absence of positive nitrogen
pressure.
The water that entered R VVH at the time
of water flushing along with baked up
alkali solution from the vas already present could find its way into the tank 610

