through the R VVH/PVH lines via the blow
down DMV or through the SRV and RD.
To account for say 60 ppm of sodium in
the residue, quantity equivalent to 25 litres
(about 6.6 gal) of 5% sodium hydroxide
would have been sufficient. Such an eventuality would have required that the blow
down DMV was malfunctioning or the SRV
was not tightly shut and rupture disc had
been damaged.
The absence of practically any nitrogen
pressure on tank 610 for over a month and
the observation that MIC was leaking out
of a branch of R VVH on the downstream
side of Regeneration Gas Cooler Pressure
Safety Valve at 23.30 hours on the night
of 2 December, 1984 indicated the possibility of malfunctioning of blowdown DMV.

.

Opportunities for intrusion of water, alkali
and metal contaminants into tank 610
thus existed from 22nd October, 1984
and into tank 611 as well during 30th
November to 1st December, 1984, when
there was negligible positive nitrogen pressure in these tanks.
Trimerisation of MIC to solid material in
small quantities and consequent choking
of lines leading to tank was a frequent
occurence and seems to have been well
accepted by the plant operating staff.
Similarly, cleaning and purging with water
of lines associated with the storage tanks
was also ~cepted as a routine procedure.
The hazards presented by ingress of water
or other contaminants which could cause
trimerisation and lead to choking was not
appreciated and the tank 610 was allowed
to say without positive nitrogen pressure
from 22nd October to 2nd December, 1984.
The UCC brochure on MIC makes reference
to the reaction of water to produce DMU
and TMB. The heat generated would be
related to the quantity of water. The brochure also mentions metallic contaminants
could lead to violent reactions of MIC which
has the unique combination of properties
of explosive reactivity, ready volatility
and high inhalation toxicity. It seems possble that small amounts of water in presence
of trace amounts of metallic contaminants
could set off explosive reactions and leakage
not containable in the inadequate VGS
system.

-

It was entirely unnecessary to provide
facilities for storage of such large amount
of MIC in tanks. The quantities stored were
quite disproportionate to the capacity of
further conversion of MIC in downstream
unit. This permitted MIC to be stored for
months together without appreciation of
potential hazards.
The events on 2nd/ard December, 1984
arose primarily from these facilities and
accepted practices.
The rapid rise in temperature and violent
reactions that occured necessitate the
onset of metal ion catalysed polymerisation.
The presence of chloroform has no influence
whatsoever in initiating or- accelerating
the run-away reactions. The chloroform
present was involved in chemical transformations when the temperature had risen
above 200 0 C at which stage all the water
would have already been consumed by
reactions.
The quantum of toxic leakage by violent
chemical reaction is not related to the
amount of metal and water which initiate
the reactions but to the quantity of MIC
stored in a single container. If 42 tonnes of
MIC had been stored in 210 stainless steel
drums of 200 litre capacity each, as alternative to a single tank, there would be no
possibility of leakage of more than one
fifth of a tonne and effects of even such
a leakage could be minimised by spray of
watet or alkali.
It has been reported that a large number
leakages of MIC in comparatively small
quantities have occured from storage vessels and tanks in Union Carbide. The
causes for such leakages have not been made
known. While Union Carbide product
brochure refers to chemical properties
and reactivity of MIC, including possibilities of violent reaction as well as of possibilities of spillages from drums and tanks
during transport, no information is. provided
on the extraordinarily lethal toXIC effects
of inhalation. Public preparedness for
eventualities arising out of leakage would
have been substantially greater if information on these had been generally available.
For instance, substantial care is exerc~sed
in the storage and transport of explOSIves

91

