tion of the engineering documents for assessing the adequacy of design and operation of the MIC
plant, etc. Various hypotheses proposed to explain the sequence of events prior to the incident
were also scrutinized by studying in detail the design specifications of the plant and equipment and
the prevailing operating conditions.
RRL
scientists assisted the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the lawyers by
providing clarifications to specific questions raised by them on the design and engineering aspects
of the MIC process plant. Some results of the above could also be found in the concluding paragraphs.

NATIONAL AERONAUTICAL LABORATORY, BANGALORE
The Report deals with investigations on stainless steel plates from MIC storage tank No. E-611
of Union Carbide Plant at Bhopal by NAL. Methods of chemical analysis and metallography using
electron microscopy have been employed for these investigations.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEANOGRAPHY, GOA
A brief summary of studies on biodegradation and anti-chlolinesterase activities of MIC in the

aquatic environment, conducted by the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Goa, with
samples collected in December 1984, February and April, 1985 is provided.

NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING RESEARCH INSTITUTE, NAGPUR
The report of work done by the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI),
Nagpur at Bhopal after the toxic gas leakage deals with the environmental parameters generated at
Bhopal after the accident. The NEERI team visited Bhopal on 4 December 1984, the day after the
incident and began analyzing air, water and soil samples. These were analyzed at Bhopal and at
Nagpur. NEERI also coordinated the collection, collation and transmission of weather data with the
Indian Meteorological Department. A sample of these reports is also given. A general note on environmental aspects of chemical accidents forms part of the Report. A number of annexures give
details of analytical data, excerpts from a similar report of the Environmental Protection Agency,
USA, on industrial pollutants, toxic effects of isocyanates in environments, etc.

INDIAN TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE, LUCKNOW
The Indian Toxicology Research Centre (ITR'C), Lucknow established a small follow-up
Study Centre at Bhopal, which began operating on 14 February 1985, to monitor various clinical
parameters of the gas-victims. About 687 patients were examined during the phase I. Systematic
investigations for studying ten different parameters involving history, clinical examination, chest
X-rays, lung function tests, h~ematologica1, behavioural immunological biochemical studies and
chromosomal conditions were undertaken. Phase II commenced from 18th March 1985 and lasted
for three more weeks.
The data presented, particularly those showing various abnormal physiological functions in
the popUlation group studied by ITRC are indicative of various deleterious effects which appear
to have been caused due to exposure to the toxic gas. All the people had complained about signs
and symptoms which had a great degree of similarity indicating that they w..ere exposed to similar
type of toxic gas. Therefore, the signs and symptoms and after-effects recorded in the study appear
to be related to their exposure to methyl isocyanate gas and any others produced and released
after the run-away reaction in the storage tank of methyl isocyanate.

94

