COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH

MEASURES TAKEN AT BHOPAL

Introduction
The Director-General, Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research, Dr. S. Varaciarajan, had
planned to visit the Regional Research Laboratory of CSIR at Bhopal on 5th December,
1984. He was asked by the Cabinet Secretary
on 4th December to coordinate all scientific
efforts at Bhopal in relation to situation following the leakage of toxic material on the early
morning of Monday, the 3rd December, 1984.

Dr. Varadarajan and other scientists and
technologists and officials from CSIR and
other organisations were in Bhopal from 5th
to 20th December. A list of those who were
present in Bhopal at various times is given in
Annexure I.
General Conditions in Bhopal
It was found that there were very considerable tragic consequences as a result of the leakage of toxic material and several deaths had
been reported and many deaths continued to
occur on 5th. There were also considerable
worry about the safety of air and water. The
factory work had been stopped and police
had been posted. A case had been registered
by the CBI against five officers of factory and
who were also under arrest within the factory
premises. Most of the factory workers were
also not available. A large contingent of p'olice
occupied the factory premises. All the shops
had been closed. Transport facilities were not
readily available. Telecommunication facilities
were extremely poor and had been disrupted.
A large number of animals had also died. Disposal of the dead as well as the disposal of
animal carcasses presented serious problems.
With still many doubts about the toxic nature
of water, air and foodstuffs, there was considerable fear among the public. A large numbers
affected outside of Bhopal were being brought

to hospitals. The medical services were highly
strained to meet this situation.
There were over 300 correspondents, 50 of
whom were foreigners or representing foreign
agencies and television teams were also present.
They were also entering factory and hospitals
freely.
Prior to his departure from Delhi, on 4th
Dec. Dr. Varadarajan arranged for scientific
teams from National Environmental Engineering
Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur, Industrial
Toxicology Research Centre (ITRC), Lucknow
the National Institute of Occupational Health
(NIOB) of ICMR, Ahmedabad, to arrive in
Bhopal on 5th December, 1984. A Central
Coordinating Cen was set up on 5th atRRL,
Bhopal headed by Professor P.K. Rohtagi
Director of the Laboratory. Appropriate analytical and testing facilities and transport were
arranged for scientists who arrived. Accommodation was also arranged for the large number of
scientists and technologists arriving in Bhopal.
Fonowing a meeting with the Chief Minister, Mr. Arjun Singh, State Government officials
and Mr. Vasant Sathe, Minister for Chemicals &
Fertilisers on the 5th morning, Dr. Varadarajan
accompanied Mr. Sathe to the factory and had
discussions with the Factory Manager and also
accompanied Mr. Sathe to inpect the lo~.tion
of the MIC plant, MIC underground tanks,
storage area and plant control room. Subsequent
to the departure of Mr. Sathe, further discussions were also held with the Factory Manager
and the Assistant Manager and it was found for
the first time that a further 15 tonnes of MIC
was present in the second tank No. 611 and this
could also be involved in a further release of
toxic material at any time. This further posed
a new hazard to a large num ber of visitors,
police and civil officials in the factory and in
the vicinity ou tside the factory as well as to

