general public especially as the risk of this was broadcast on the radio and press notes
materials was not known to them. The general were also released.
public had also no knowledge of what precautions are to be observed in the event of (ii) Precautions to be taken
further leakage of toxic material.
The people were advised that there was no
Action Takendanger in the air. Water could also be used
preferably with the usual precaution of boilThe actions taken cover the following- ing the water as there was some possibility
of communicable diseases such as cholera and
i) Examination of the environment imme- plague spreading from undisposed bodies and
diately to see whether toxic material was carcasses. Public were also advised that they
present,
should wash all foodstuffs or boil them in water.
This is because MIC reacts readily with water
ti) If so what further precautions should be especially with wann water and it is converted
taken and advice given to the STate Govem- to harmless material. Through these measures
ment and through them to the public, the public confidence in the environment was
restored. These precautions were repeated for
iii) Action to be taken to estimate the pro- several days and public fears were allayed on
bability of further leakage of toxic ma- consequences from further leakages.
terial and if possible to prevent such an
event;
(iii) Estimating the probability of further
leakage
iv) In the event of leakage occurring, precautions to be taken on minimising the Discussions held at the factory on the morning
damage to those present in the factory of 5th December showed that there are three
and to public outside including possibi- stainless steel tanks each of about 60 tonnes
capacity. All pipeline connections for filling
lity of evacaution of population.
tanks with MIC from the distillation column of
v) Actions on safe disposal of the remaining MIC, the pipelines for removal of MIC to reacMIC and any other toxic material found in tion vessels or for filling in steel drums, the
pipeline for pressurising with nitrogen, the
the factory;
outlet from safety valves to alkali scrubber,
vi) Immediate examination of post-mortem were all through a common system. It was
cases, animal carcasses as well as those also found that tank 610 from which the toxic
affected otherwise so that full scientific material leaked and the tank 611 in which furobservations could be made at this critical ther material was present were both filled with
varying quantities of MIC during the production
time for future examination.
of MIC and material produced upto 22nd
October
had been stored in both these tanks and
viii)
Coordination of all scientific efforts
the
filling
was done through common pipelines.
and arrangements for information release
Material
from
either of the tanks was taken
so that only authoritative data is given
out
from
time
to time for further processing
to press, to the State and Central Governupto
2nd
December.
Thus, there was no reason
ments to avoid confusion and panic.
to suspect the quality of the remaining material
Notes on all these are recorded below- in tank 611 estimated at 15 tonnes by factory
management to be any different from the quality
of the material that had been stored in tank
(i) Safety of environment
610 and from which toxic material was reTeams of sciehtists analysed air and water leased on the night of 2nd Dec. There was,
samples as well as material from various sur- therefore, no reason to believe that the hazard
faces in the factory and outside and results in rnat.erial in tank 611 was any different from
showed that there was no further MIC in the the hazards which had already taken place from
air or in water and no detectable material on the material from tank 610. Thus the high risk
surfaces. The State Government was immediate- of further release of toxic material was conly advised on 5th evening accordingly and this firmed by 11.30 hours on 5th December, It was ~

