Sciences, Patel Chest Institute and Indian
Council of Medical Research visited and stayed
for substantial periods in Bhopal. They visited
hospitals and had discussions with the Director
of Medical Services and the Heads of hospitals
and were able to monitor the treatment given
for heavy toxicity affecting lungs as well as
to those whose eyes were effected. A wealth
of information was obtained from observations as well as from the post mortem examinations. This will be of considerable value in
future. Special assistance was also given for
analysis of materials drawn from patients and
also during post mortem examination.

have scientific groups from ICMR, Patel Chest
Institute, AIIMS, National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Cancer Research Centre, Indian
Agricultural Research Institute and other institutions of ICAR, the Defence Research Laboratories in addition to those from CSIR Laboratories. Visits by Director-General, ICMR,
Additional Director-General, ICMR, Adviser
(Biotechnology), Department of Science &
Technology, Adviser (Chemicals) and other
officials from Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers were also arranged. Extensive investigations were also conducted by the Additional
Director-General, ICMR. Special arrangements
were also made for reserving certain number of
A number of foreign medical personnel had seats on lAC flights between Delhi and Bhopal
also visited Bhopal and were offering advice and for the reception of personnel accommoDiscussions were also held with such medical dation and transport. Laboratory facilities
sL'~n~ists from Germany, USA, France and were also provided at RRL, Bhopal.
Scandanavian countries.
The various institutes were asked to make
(vii)
Collection of materials for future exa- literature surveys regarding the toxic effects
mination
of MIC and related isocynates and a large
amount of material became available. In addiArrangements were made for collecting ma- tion material has been received from interterial from post mortem examination and national organisations and research institutes.
organs and tissues have been preserved along
with data on symptoms and conditions of
Throughout this period, the Scientists of
patients before death Additional material CSIR carried out a large number of analyses
from animal carcasses has also been collected. in the factory and in the research centre of
The histories of patients and if the dead from UCIL Bhopal. These analytical results proved
whom collection of samples was made, has useful in drawing up the course of action in
also been recorded so that the effects of MIC the processing of MIC and in estimating the
over a period of exposure could be examined. risk.
Later on, there were also certain d",layed effects and return of patients and observations have
Towards the end of operations for conversion of MIC, it was decided to open the
been made on them.
safety valve and the section connected to
Samples have also been collected of plant tank 610 after taking necessary precautions.
specimens, leaves etc. Observations have been A certain amount of solid material has been
made to see if any deterioration has not taken replaced. The original safety valve and the
place. These materials are also being analysed ruptured disc have been handed over t 0 CBI.
The material collected from this section has
by ICAR as well as CSIR Laboratories.
been subjected to preliminary investigation
in
CSIR Laboratories and in the IPCL Re(viii) Coordination of efforts:
search Centre. From this, appears there is no
As mentioned earlier a Coordinating Cell for TUB or TMB present. Most of the material
this purpose was set up in RRL, Bhopal where consists of trimmer and there is some amount
a meeting of all scientific groups were held at of volatiles. No DMU or TMB has been found.
1400 hours daily. Written reports were made The examinations are being carried out and
by each group every day. These have been results of which are awaited. Analysis for
collected and oral reports were also made in trace metals has also been made and presence
such meetings. As a result some additional tasks of metals has been recorded. Small quantity
of material from inside the tank 610 has also
were also given to scientific groups.
been recovered for examination which is in
progress. However immediately after these
Special arrangements were also made to

