NATIONAL CHEMICAL LABORATORY
PUNE

THE BHOPAL ACCIDENT
REPORT ON
CHEMICAL REACTION ENGINEERING ANALYSIS

1986

A report on the investigations by National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune, could be found in
the following pages. NCL, which belongs to the Chemicals Sciences Group of laboratories of the
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, undertook the task of studying the chemical and
reaction engineering aspects of MIC leakage. The results are dealt with in Part I and Part II.
Part I begins with a presentation of analytical procedures and results of various chemical
samples collected from the tanks, pipings, etc. at the site of the accident including core samples
from the ill-fated Tank 610. The analysis reveals the existence of a large number of compounds
which must have been formed during the event. Possible chemistry of the events and details of
experiments to verify the postUlates are also given. The experiments carried out have conclusively
shown that a mixture of MIC, chloroform and water when heated to 225 0 C to 250 0 C in a stainless
steel reactor gives all the products found in Tank 610, though not in the same quantitative proportion. The concluding section gives the experimental studies to determine the ways in which hydrogen cyanide (apparent cyanide poisoning in many patients having been observed) could have been
formed.
Part II presents a modelling and computer simulation of the Bhopal accident. The model
is based on the essential findings in Part 1. These data, together with experimental data on the key
reactions between MIC and water, MIC trimerization, etc. were analyzed to obtain the rate kernel.
The mathematical model is developed subsequently with a number of simplified assumptions. The
three stage model; thus developed, is discussed further. This particular model helps in putting
quantitative bounds on the temperature and pressure reached in the accident tank and provides an
approximate descnption of the dynamics of the whole process during the event.

1

