1. INTRODUCTION

A major leakage of toxic gases took place on the
night of December 2, 1984 at the Union Carbide
factory in Bhopal from a buried stainless steel
tank (tank 610) in which forty two tonnes of
methyl isocyanate (MIC) had been stored. This
event resulted in enormous loss of human life
and injuries to a significant proportion of the
population. Whereas the consequences of such
a major event have been obviously tragic, the
causes have not been well understood. The
National Chemical Laboratory was assigned the
tasks of examining the chemical and reaction
engineering aspects of the accident. This report
provides the details of the investigations carried
out by NCL team of scientists.
The report is presented in two parts. Part I
deals with the chemical aspects and Part II
deals with the reaction engineering aspects of
the problem. The method of enquiry in Part I
is largely experimental in nature while Part II
uses the essential findings from Part I as the
basis to construct an engineering model to
describe the events leading to MIC leakage.
Part I begins with the analysis of samples
which were recovered from the ill-fated tank
610 after the accident. The details of the
methods of analysis and composition of residue
are presented in· Section 2. The analysis reveals
the existence of a large number of compounds
which must have been formed during the event.

Section 3 discusses the possible chemistry of the
event and gives details of experimental studies
carried out to verify these postUlates. The
experiments carried out have conclusively shown
that a mixture of MIC, chloroform and water
when heated to 225 0 to 250 0 C in a stainless
steel reactor gives all the products found in
Tank 610, though not in the same quantitative proportion. Finally, Section 4 is devoted
to the experimental studies to determine
whether HeN could have been formed during
the event.
The analysis in Part II begins with the main
results derived in Part I as its basis. Section I
of this part therefore highlights the essential
findings of Part I which are gennane to the development of a mathematical model. Section 3
analyses the experimental data on the key
reactions between MIC and water, MIC trimerisation, etc. with a view to obtain the rate
kernel. The mathematical model is developed
subsequently with a number of simplifying
assumptions, which have been clearly outlined.
Section 4 discusses NCL's three stage model of
the Bhopal accident. The important implications
of the results are discussed in Section 5. In
particular the model helps in putting quantitative bounds on the temperature and pressures
reached in the accident tank and also provides
an approximate description of the dynamics of
the whole process during the event.

