2. ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES

In order to reconstruct the event, it was necessary to obtain reliable analytical results of
various chemical samples connected with the
event. Samples were collected from the site of
the accident in various batches. The first samples
of residue from the tank were collected in
February 1985 through the manhole nozzles of
the tank. Later, windows were cut at the specific
point of the tank and fu~her samples were
collected. Samples from various pipelines,
especially, R VVH/PVH and associated pipelines
were also collected.

88

8

In all, samples were collected in five batches.
The list of the samples alongwith their code
nos and dates of collection are attached as
Annexure 2.2.

f:'\

8~
B0110{\1

201 Sampling

2.1.1

Core samples from the manhole nozzle

All the five nozzles located on the manhole
cover were opened one after another and core
samples were drawn (see Figure 2). A pipe
section was mechanically forced inside the
residue till it reached the bottom of the tank.
The residue entering the pipe was pushed out
by using a closely fitting pusher rod inside the
pipe. The samples thus pushed out of the pipe
section formed a cylindrical semi-solid mass.
Each sample was divided longitudinally into
4 portions with the bottom material in contact
with the vessel wall receiving identification
number 1 of the respective series. Similarly,
alphabets A to E were used for identifying the
samples from different nozzles (see Figure 2.1).

2.1.2

Samples from tank residue after opening
the tank

Samples from various locations inside the tank
were collected after cutting windows on the
body of the tank. Various sampling points and
windows on the body are presented in Figure
2.2. After cutting windows on the body of the

TOP

CORE Sl\NPLE

A.

f.~F ET'f

VAt 'JE

a.

PROCE~

\JENl

C. SPARE
o THERMO~ElL
Q

E. L£\lEL \NDtCATlO N
Fig. 2.1: Sample Identification

tank, the inside of the tank was photographed.
One of the important observations made during
the opening of the windows was a very strong
smell of amines. Four sets of samples were
taken from each window. Samples were collected using a 5 cm dia. stainless steel pipe section
and divided into 4 equal parts as described in
2.1.1. Each sample was properly marked and
coded. For example, a sample marked 8-H-1
represents the bottom cross-section of the residue from window 'C' collected on 8th April.
The time and date of sampling were also marked
on the sample bottle tags. The tank residue was
found to be about 52 cm deep.

7

