2.1.3

MIC samples from tank 611

MIC was stored in 3 storage tank in the Union
Carbide factory. The tanks are designated
E-610, E-611 and E-619. During the night of
December 2-3, 1984, the mishap occurred in
tank E-610. Tank 611 still contained large
quantities of MIC.
The samples of MIC from tank 611 had been
collected in 200 ml capacity pressure bottles
closed by spring-loaded ball valves. Each bottle
contained about 125 to 150 ml of MIC. The
samples were then analysed for specification
tests. The MIC in tank 611 was as per the required specification and the data are given in
Table 2.2.

levels showed deposits due to sublimation.
The top portion of the tank (inside) showed
only thin blackish deposits or sublimates.
Examination through a microscope indicated
crystals in the deposits. Metal pieces cut out
from the sides or lower portions of the tank
showed comparatively higher amounts of
deposits.
2.2 Chemical Analysis

2.2.1

PhYSical appearance of samples of residue:

All the samples from tank 610 were thick, semisolid in consistency, and brownish in colour.
The samples tended to absorb moisture on
exposure to air and had the smell of amines.
A sample of MIC from tank 619 was collec- The consistency of the bottom portion was
ted on 14.3.85 at 1.20 p.m. Earlier, 2 samples quite different from that of the top. The top
of MIC were collected from the chiller line to portion of the residue appeared to be dark
tank 610 on 4.12.84. The analysis of these brown and' was more hygroscopic and liquidlike
3 samples are given in Table 2.2a. They were in nature. The bottom portion appeared to conall of specification.
sist of a high percentage of crystalline compound and was light in colour.
2.1.4 Samples from pipelines, valves and other
equipments
2.2.2 Solubility Characteristics:

Liquid samples were collected from R VVH/ The solubility characteristics of the samples
PVH and other equipment in February and May, were studied initially for developing the analyti1985. Description of these samples given in cal methods. Chloroform and acetone dissolvAnnexure 2.2 and their analyses of chloride ed 70 to 85% of the samples. Hot toluene also
ion, acidity and alkalinity are given in Table dissolved a major portion of the samples. On
2.10.
cooling the toluene extracts, crystals separated and were identified as dimethylisocyanuric
2.1.5 Metal pieces cut from Tank 610
acid. Water was also found to dissolve the
sample, but complete dissolution required
In April 1985, a team of experts examined large quantities of water.
the tank. The surface was found to be coated
with bitumen with nylon fibre reinforcements.
The bituminous layer was removed and examin- 2.2.3 Qualitative Analysis
ed. The tank had six numbers of steel stiffening
Smell: The samples showed a strong smell
rings welded all around. The tank had bulged
of amines.
significantly between the stiffening rings. The
nature of the bulges indicated high internal
Acidity or alkalinity: The samples were
pressures.
highly acidic
Several pieces were cut out from tank 610.
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC): TLC
The locations are shown in Figure 2.2. A round
carried
out on silica gel indicated the prepiece of metal (28 cm diameter) was cut out
sence
of
about 15 compounds. These were
from the manhold (WA). Square pieces were
later
identified
by spotting standard comcut out from locations WB, we, WD and WE.
pounds
on
the
TLC
plates.
All metal pieces were photographed. Physical
examination of the pieces showed a blackish
Chloride ions: Residue samples indicated
coating on the inside surface. The metal pieces
positive
tests for chloride ions.
cut out from the sides nearer to the residue

9

