Metal ions: The residue after treatment with
hydrochloric acid was tested_ for metal ions.
Positive tests were obtained for the following metallic ions: iron, nickel, chromium and
molybdenum

L
2.
3.
4.
5.

Cyanide

6.
70
8.

ions:

Residue sample
negative test for cyanide ions.

2.2.4

showed

Analytical Procedures

Different techniques were employed for the
quantitative estimation of compounds in the
samples. The organic compounds were determined by gas liquid chromatography (GLC).
Except for the amines, all the organic compounds could be well separated on FFAP
column or other columns as detailed in Annexure 2.1. Acetone was used as the solvent for
the analysis. It was found that acetone in
presence of dimethyl-amine (2%) dissolved
about 95% of the residue. The acetone insoluble (approximately 3-6%) showed metal chlorides (approximately 1%). It did not contain
antines or other identified organic compounds.
The amines could be separated using a TEPA +
KOH column on chromosorb 102. Most of
the compounds were isolated from the residue
using various techniques and their identity
established by spectral data (IR, NMR and
MS) by direct comparison with those of pure
compounds.
The aCid present in the samples and the
chloride were determined by potentiometric
titration.
Metallic ions as iron, chromium, nickel,
calcium and magnesium were determined by
atomic absorption and sodium by flame photometry.
Moisture contents in the samples were
determined by Karl-Fischer titration.
Accuracy and reproducibility of analysis
were established by using standard mixtures
prepared from pure compounds.

2.2.5

Analy tical Results

The following compounds were identified in
the residue samples taken from various locations
in tank 610. The chemical structures of the first
seven compounds are given in Figure 2.3.

If)

9.
10.
11.

120

Methylisocyanate trimer (MICT)
Dimethylisocyanurate (DMI)
Dimethyl urea (DMU)
Trimethyl urea (TMU)
Dione
Trimethyl biuret (TMB)
Tetramethyl biuret (TRMB)
Monomethyl amine (MMA)
Dimethyl amine (DMA)
Trimethyl amine (TMA)
Chloride
Metallic ions (Fe, Cr, Ni, Mo, Na,Ca,Mg)

The analytical results are summarised in
Tables, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8.
2.3 'Total representative' sample of residue and
its analysis:

A total representative sample was prepared by
mixing samples drawn from the various windows
of the tanK. The sample thus prepared as representative of tn~ zntire quantity of the residue
was mixed and homogenised. This sample was
prepared by mixing equal quantities from 22
different residue samples. These samples represent the bottom portions, middle portions
at different axial positions along the 40 feet
long storage tank. Two such samples were
prepared initially, each of which was divided
into 2 portions. These were then cross-mixed
to provide two representative samples.
Total analysis was carried out on' this sample
and the analytical results were used to calculate
various factors relating to the 'event'. The
analytical procedures adopted were the same
as described earlier. The results of the analysis are presented in Table 2.9.
The total identified compounds in the
sample add up to ~bout 95%. As indicated earlier, the residue samples contain about 3-6% of
unidentified tarry materials.
2.3.1

Product distribution

Besides the presence of various metal and chloride ions, the residue contains 10 organic compounds. These are presented as kg moles in the
last column of Table 2.9. The tank residue
contains 40.7 kg moles (or about 7000 kg of
MIC trimer). The next highest molar concentr~­
tion is that of DMI with 17.0 kg moles (2675
kg), followed by the chloride ions with a con-

