3. Carlo Erba - Fracto vap 2450 coupled with
spectra

physics - sp-4100 - computing integrator.
G. C. conditions
Column - FFAP 3% on chromosorb W-HP
2 mm ID x 100 cms

Detector - Flame Ionisation (Detector (FID)
Carrier gas - IOLAR • 1 nitrogen 35 milmine

Temperatures
Column oven - 1900 C
Injection port - 225°C

100 ml beaker and repeatedly extracted with
c6ntaining 2% of dimethylanune. The
extraction was repeated 4 tunes with 15 ml.
port.ions of the acetone containing dimethylanune. The dimethyl amine insures the dissolution of all the organic compounds excepting
the tarry compounds in this sample. The
extracts were made up to 100 ml. and the
solution (0.4 pI) was injection into the Gas
Chromatograph~ About 3 to 6% of tarry residue
remained undissolved. Metal chlorides (0.8%)
only could be identified in the insoluble residue. The results were calculated by the reporting
integrator. The accuracy of the results were
checked by injecting known samples into the
GC.
a~etone

In case of analysis done using internal standard quantitation, concentration of internal
standard was kept constant for standards as well
as samples.

Detector - 225°C
The reliability and reproducibility of the
methods were checked by analysing known
Injection \ .>lume - 2 1
standard samples. The
results obtained by
absolute calibration curve method 44 are tabulaTotal analysis time -15 min.
ted in Table 2.9. Reliability test used for the
Method employed for quantitative estimation - external standard method was the determination of standard deviation for each standard
Internal standard.
compound.
Several compounds were tried as an internal
standard, out of which dibutyl phthalate, was
The values of reliability test using internal
selected since its retention time was not inter- standard are recorded in Tables.
fering with any other component of the sample
matrix.
All the values obtained from the different
methods are within the acceptable range for
G .C. analysis. In the case of DMI the percentage
variation exceeds 5% and is due to a somewhat
Standard solutions of all the compounds with skewed-peak. However, the analysis at lower
equal amount of internal standard were prepar- concentrations and in internal standard are
ed. r.oncentration of these standard solutions quite reliable; peaks are normal.
had
wide range. This was necessary for area
mat 'f'lng as in the case of external standard.
Determination of Amines by Gas ChromatoStandard solutions with internal standard

Retention time data and order of elution

Retention times and elution data for all the
compounds on all the columns are given in
Tables A-2.1 A-2.2 Copies of representative
chromatograms are attached in Figs. A.1, A.2.
Analysis procedure

Determination of organic compounds by GLC:
Sample preparation:

About 3 gms. of the sample was weighed in a

graphy

Various columns were investigated for the separation and quantitative analysis of amines by
Gas Chromatography, the column described
rplow was developed and was found suitable for
the quantitative estimation of amines.
Instrument and Chromatographic Conditions

Shimadzu Gas Chromatograph RIA coupled
with the reporting integrator was used for all
chromatographic estimations. The performance
of the chromatograph was checked periodically
by injecting standard mixtures.

29

