3. A

PLAUSIBLE

CHEMISTRY

OF

THE EVENT

In order to gain some understanding of the acid anion formed in the reaction could have
complex chemistry of the reactions that occur- promoted the trimerization reaction.
red in tank 610 and the various plausible routes
by which the products found could have been
In the above laboratory reactions, even
formed, some sixty odd laboratory experi- though most of the products found in tank
ments are given in Table A-3.1.
610 could be identified, one exception was
tetramethylbiuret (TRMB) traces of which
The reactions were carried out in S.S. bombs have been found.in the residue in tank 610
at specified temperatures and predetermined but not in the laboratory products. This has
times, cooled to DoC or less and the product been attributed mainly to the differences in
extracted, first with acetone, and then with the rates of various reactions occurring in
water. The residue from the acetone extract the laboratory S.S. bomb as compared to
was submitted to direct GLe analysis. Both-- those in tank 610. Thus, since, TRMB is foran OV-210 + OV-17 stationary phase on chro- med by the reaction of trim ethyl urea (TMU)
mosorb column which shows TRMB as a clear with MIC, sufficient quantities of the latter
separate peak and an FFAP on chromosorb in monomeric un-trimerized form should still
column were used for analysis. Details of instru- be available at the high temperatures {above
mental conditions and methods of standardi- 200 0 C) at which TMU is formed. Apparently
zation and peak matching are given in the this was the situation In Tank 610 during the
chapter on Analysis. In most cases the total event. However, in the laboratory experiments,
residue from the acetone extract did not elute the rate of trimerization of MIC must have
completely from the GLC columns due to pre- been higher so that by the time TMU is formed
sence of some quantities of amine hydrochlo- above 200 o C, not much monomeric MIC rerides, other polar materials and small quantities mained to react with it and form TRMB. Inof polymeric substances. Therefore, the percent- deed, planned laboratory experiments in which
ages of the various· product components re- TMU was included in the reactants gave deported in Table A-a.1 do not add up to hundred. tectable quantities of TRMB.
They represent the percentages of these compoAll the experiments listed in Table A-3.l
nents present in the total acetone extract for
have been carefully planned to gain maximum
that particular experiment.
insight into the reaction in Tank 610. The
Both acetone and water extracts were philosophy has been to 'get maximum information with minimum experimentation'.
tested for chloride ions.
The important deductions from the foreIt became clear at an early stage of experimentation that a combination of MIC contain- going experiments can be summarised as foing chloroform and small quantities of water, llows.
when heated above 2000 C in a closed S.S.
reactor gave essentially all the products found
in tank 610, though not in the same proporReaction with water
tion. Also, it was not necessary to add ferric 3.1
chloride or other ionic metal catalysts to
In the MIC-chloroform-water system, water
promote trimerisation of MIC. Obviously,
reacts
with 2 moles of MIC to form dimethysufficient metal ion concentration for catalyand carbondioxide (Eq. 1). In an
lurea
(DMU)
sis was generated by corrosion of S.S. under
environment
of
excess MIC, the DMU formed
the reaction conditions used. It is also likely
begins
to
react
with MIC to give trimethylthat other known catalysts such as tertiary
biuret
(TMB)
(Eq.
2).
amines (trimethylamine, TMA) and isocyanic
42

