It appears fairly certain that the methylene
(-CH 2-) group of dione is derived from the
C-atom of chloroform (CHCl 3 ). The actual reaction is probably dichloromethane (CH 2 Cl )
2
which is known to be formed from CHC1 oy
3
disproportionation or reduction. Thus, when
TMB was heated with either chlorofornl (Expt.
No. 28) or dichloromethane (Expt. No. 54) to
250°C, dione was formed. However, heating
TMB alone (Expt. No. 29) gave no dione although the other products were formed.

The experimentation also indicates that
the formation of dione begins only around
200 0 C or so. Percentage of dione comparable
to that found in residue of tank 610 was present only in reactions run at 250o C.
3.5

Dimethylisocyanurate (DMI)

DMI was the second most abundant product
found in tank 610. It is known to be readily
formed by the reaction of MIC with isocyanic
acid or its salts (Eq. 4).

(4)

2CH NCO + HNCO
3
Isocyanic
acid
DMI

Since structurally DMI is a demethylation in the product.
product of MICT which was the most abundant
component found in the tank residue, experiTherefore, DMI must have formed by the
ments were conducted (Expt. Nos. 1 to 4, 9, reaction shown in Eq. 4. Formation of HNCO in
21, 30 and 34) to see if MICT could be induced a large excess of MIC would readily give DMI.
to undergo a demethylation reaction in the What are the plausible modes of formation of
presence of suitable substrates. However, even HNCO?
up to 280°C to aoooc, MICT was found to be
The UCC scientists UCC report, p. 34)
quite stable to mono methylamine hydrochlo- based on their own work, suggest the thermal
ride (MMA.HCI) or chloroform with or without decomposition of dimethylallophanyl chloride
water. Even traces of DMI could not be detected (DMAC) shown in Eq. 5:

/~~

H-N)

r
CH 3

(, ~-CH

"-t)

rY

3

heat :>

(5)

C~

Cl

Even though this thermal degradation reaction is quite plausible, proceeding through a
cyclic six-membered transition state, the quantities of DMAC estimated to be present in MIC
were quite small and therefore could not
account for all the DMI found in the tank

44

residue.
A more plausible explanation of the formation of HNCO would be the thermal decomposition of TMB. This reaction and its
mechanism is depicted in Eq. 6:

