Appendix-4A

ANAL YTICAl PROCEDURES
Estimation of Cyanide

Procedure - C

The HCN formed by pyrolyses of MIC in sealed
ampoules was absorbed by breaking the ampoules in an alkali solution of known strength.
The resulting alkali metal cyanide was then
estimated. Two methods were standardised
and practised for the estimation of alkali metal
cyanides so formed.

Paradimethyl aminobenzalrhodanine indicator

1. Titrimetric method

To a known volume of cyanide solution, 10 ml
of 1N-sodium hydroxide solution and 0.5 ml
indicator solution (which was prepared by
dissolving 20 mg of indicator in 100 ml of
acetone) was added. It was titrated with standard silver nitrate solution till colour of the
solution changed from a canary yellow to a
salmon hue.

Cyanide was titrated against a solution of
AgNOa of known strength using three differWhile carrying out titrations by any of
ent indicator reagents depending upon the these methods care was taken to prepare stannature and colour of alkali metal cyanide dard solutions of cyanide with concentrations
solutions. They are similar to the ones found in the test solutions
in order to compare the end points in more
precise manner and thereby increasing accuracy
(A)
Potassium iodide
of the results.
(B)

Diphenylcarbazide

(e)

Paradimethylaminobanzalrhodanine

Procedure - A

The Argentometric titration methods were
useful to detect cyanide upto a level of 1 mg/lit.
of eN- depending upon colour and clarity of
the alkali metal cyanide solutions under investigation.

Potassium iodide method

2. Colorimetric method

To about 25 ml of cyanide containing solution, 75 ml of water and 5 ml of 6N-ammonia
solution was added. To this was added 2 ml
of 10% leI solution. This mixture was then
titrated with standard AgNOa solution. The
end point was persistence of yellow silver
iodide and a permanent turbidity.

Te
The alkali metal cyanide solutions containing
cyanide, below the detectable limits of Argentometric titration methods were subjected
to spectrophotometric analysis. The method
selected for this purpose used following reagents a) Barbituric acid

Procedure· 8
b) Chloramine - T
Diphenyl carbazide method
c) Pyridine
In this procedure the cyanide solution was
titrated with standard silverhitrate solution
using 2 to 3 drops of diphen'ylcarbazide indicator solution (containing 0.18 of indicator
in 100 ml of alcohol). The end point was a
permanent violet colour.

d) Sodium dihydrogen phosphate
e) Sodium hydroxide
f)

Concentrated Hel

61

