At a pH less than 8 {winch is adjusted by development. Absorbance of developed colour
NaH2P04) the eN- in the alkaline solution of was recorded at 578 nm within 15 min fronl
alkali Inetal cyanide is converted to cyanogen- the time at which the pyridine barbituric acid
chloride, (eNCl) by chloramine-To This (eNCI) reagent was added. A calibration CUl'Ve was
reacts with Pyridine-Barbituric acid reagent slotted by using series of standard known conto produce a dye. The absorbance of this aque- centration cyanide solutions of suitable range
ous solution is then measured at 578 nm.
and the concentration of cyanide in test solution was found from the standard curves.
Preparation of solutions
lon-selective electrode
(a) Chloramine '- T - 19 in 100 ml of water

Solutions. Standard cyanide solution 0.5 gm of
(b) Sodium dihydrogen phosphate- (1 m) 138 g of NaH2P04. H20 in one litre of

water.
(c) Sodium hydroxide
(O.25N)
10 g of NaOH in one lit of water.

Dissolve

(d) Pyridine-Barbituric acid reagent.

sodiuIn cyanide was dissolved in O.IN Sodium
hydroxide. Solution was standardised by titrating against standard silver nitrate potentiometrically. A cyanide ion selective electrode
coupled with a reference electrode was used
for the titration.

Equipments. Digital high impedance mv meter,

eN

15g of Barbituric acid was taken into 250 ml
volumetric flask and just enough water was
added to wash sides of the flask and to wet the
barbituric acid. To this 75 mlro! pyridine was
added. To this 15 ml conc. HCI was added and
allowed to cool to room~ t~Hllferature. It was
then diluted upto the mark and was shaken
well.

Procedure
A suitable volume of test solution was taken
and diluted to 20 ml with 0.25N NaOH. This
portion was. placed in a 50 ml volumetric flask.

15 ml of phosphate buffer was added and
mixed thoroughly. To this solution 2 ml chloramine-T solution was added and swirled to
mix. To this 5 ml pyridine barbituric acid
solution was added and again swirled to mix.
It was diluted to the mark with water and
mixed well. It was kept for 8 min. for colou'

62

electrode (anion) and a single junction reference electrode.

Calibration cu rve
Standard CN solutions were prepared by serial
dilution of stock solution. Measurements were
carried out by introducing eN electrode and
reference electrode in respective solutions.
mv readings were under stirred conditions.
Readings for the standard solutions are given
below.
Cone. ppm
468
46.8
4.68
0.46

mv Read

260
195
195
85

Calibration curve was prepared by plotting
eN cone. (100 axis) against mv readings.

