PART II
5. Modelling and Computer simulation
of Bhopal accident

5.1. GENERAL PHILOSOPHY OF
MODELLING
The main results of the modelling and simulation efforts of the MIC leakage from the tank
610 are presented in this report. For reasons of
brevity the details such as the physico-chemical
data, chemistry of the various possible reactions,
the analytical tools used and results of the analysis of the residue from the tank presented in
Part I have been omitted hAre. For reasons of
completeness, however, the essential points from
Part I have been highlighted as and when required.
The model h~s been developed in three
different phases. The first stage begins with the
entry of water which reacts with the stored MIC
and leads to the evolution of C02 with accompanying rise in temperature of the liquid due to
the exothermicity of the reaction. The pressure
in the tank builds up due to the generation of
C02 and MIC vapours and eventually the gas
starts leaking out. The stage when the safety
valve opens marks the end of the first phase and
the beginning of the second phase. The model in
the first phase restricts the extent of reaction.
However, the evolution of gas during the first
phase causes considerable extent of mixing within the tank and the storage tank now resembles
a well stirred reactor. The second phase of
modelling recognises this feature and models the
system behaviour appropriately.
It is appreciated that water in the system is
a limiting reactant and during the course of
events gets totally consumed. The end of waterMIG reaction therefore marks the end of the
second phase. During the third and the final
stage of modelling the WIC-water reaction is of
less importance. The trimerisation reaction,
however, still continues and mainly contributes
to the rise in the temperature.

models the system behaviour as a batch reactor,
during the second and the third phases the presence of leakage of gas inlplies representation of
the system as a semi-continuous reactor. The
loss of material through the tank depletes its
contents and proper accounting of it is necessary
for model computations. In addition one needs
to characterise the several reactions that go on
within the tank in terms of their rates and exoth~rmicity. While the physico-chemical and
thermodynamic data for these reactions are
available or can be generated with desired levels
of accuracy, the information on the kinetics or
the individual 'rates of reaction of the several
processes is not readily available. The present
report derives this information fronl the set of
laboratory scale experiments reported in the
Union Carbide document.
Before we begin with a rigorous development of the model, it is helpful to obtain an
order of magnitude estimate of the extent of
products and their distribution reported from
the analysis of the tank. It is noted that the tank
contained a residue of approximately 12.5 tonnes with almost two-thirds of it in the form of a
trimerised product. The analysis therefore reveals that the trimerization of MIG constitutes a
major reaction that proceeded in the tank.
Among other products that have been noticed
the distribution suggests that most of them can
be accounted due to the reaction of MIG with
monomethylamine (MMA) - a reactant which
itself is a product of MIC-water reaction. The
analysis thus gives a clue to the three main reactions which must have proceeded within the
tank. It is thus anticipated that the spate of
events begins with the reaction of MIG with
water which produces G02 and MMA. MMA in
tum starts reacting with MIC forming other
products. Simultaneously MIC undergoes tri·
merization the rate of which is decided by the
extent of availability of the catalytic species
FeGla.

It will be noted that while the first phase
6.~

