In addition, based on the analysis, vapours
that left the tank can be estimated to be around
28 tons. The tank before the accident has been
reported to be nearly two-thirds filled with MIC.
which presumably contained a little higher pro~
portion of chloroform than usual. The present
report assumes that the tank had about 8%
chloroform contamination. Based on the material balance considerations presented in the Part
I, we also assume that about 450 liues of water
entered the tank. These values have been used
for quantitative evaluation of the model.

experiments, as reported here, the rise in temr
erature of the contents has, however, been limited (22 0 -32 0 C) and as such these data have beer
fitted by using a polynomial expression of fifth
degree

r

C0 2

= a + bt + ct2 + dt3 + et4

(1)

The coefficients a-e have been obtained for the
best fit as a = 8240, b = -9510, c = 4930, d =
-1010 and e = 71.1. The estimated values of the
amount of gas evolved per unit time as obtained
b~ using equation (1) have been plotted in
Flgure 1. The experimental data and the predic.
tions from equation (1) can be seen to agree
within one percent accuracy.

In order that we can proceed with our model
building effort, we need kinetic rate data on
various reactions that occured. Unfortunately, as
mentioned earlier, no such data are readily available. As regards the main stoichiometric reaction
between water and MIC, laboratory scale experiIt is of interest to note that the temperature
ments have been undertaken by Union Carbide
of
the
reaction mixture varies with time and has
with a limited but systematic variation of the
been
recorded
for certain values of the measured
pertinent parameters(3). These data will be used
time
along
the
curve. This information can be
by us in the absence of any other data.
utilised to derive the temperature sensitivity of
5.2 ESTIMATION OF MODEL PARAMETERS this re~cti~n. For. this purpose the rate of C02
formatlon IS descrIbed by equation (1) has been
separated
into its temperature and concentra2.1 Analysis of the rate data
tion dependent forms as
Based on the analysis of the residue in the
(2)
rC02 = r(T) f(c)
tank it is clear that the three main reactions that
proceeded in the tank are the MIG-water reaction, MIG-MMA reaction and the MIG trhnerisa- where the temperature dependent part can be
tion reaction. The laboratory scale experimental expressed as
data on MIC-water and MIG-trimerisation reactions in the presence of varying strengths of
(T· 293)j
r(T) = r(To)
exp (3)
FeC13 concentration in solution have been reR (293T)
ported in the Union Carbide document and have
been analysed here to extract the quantitative
information regarding the rates of these process- This procedure yields the activation energy of
this particular reactor step as E =. 30 Kcal/mole.
es.
In all the subsequent analysis, the MIC-water
The laboratory scale experiments on MIC- reaction has been expressed in the form of equawater reaction are carried out in a well stirred tion (1) with activation energy as estimated
round-bottom container and the experimental above.
data are reported by noting the amount of gas
The experimental data on trimerization of
(C02) evolved as a function of time. The two
MIC
in the presence of different extents of ferric
sets of experiments reported differ in the initial
chloride
have been similarly analysed. The excpmposition of mixture and the data are reproduced here in Figure 1. It is obvious from the perimental data have been reproduced here in
reported data that the reaction is exothermic Figure 2 and the typical curve for 66 ppm FeelS
and entails a certain rise in temperature as marked along the curves. The system containing a has been fitted using the polynomial to obtain
100:10 volumetric ratio of MIG-water is more
t +
vigorous with sharper rise in temperature as
ltrimer = 0.01808 + 0.02282
2 - 0.000007088 t 3
0.0000142
t
compared to the system containing 100:5 proportion of MIC-water. In the laboratory scale
(4)

~

66

