Other curves for different extents of FeC1 3 can

be similarly fitted. The one reported here, how-

ever, is believed to faB in a range that is close to
the FeCl3 contents analysed from the tank and
has been subsequently used in model computation.
No data on MIC-MMA reaction have been
reported. It is known, however, that the MICMMA reaction is much faster than the MICwater reaction. It is expected therefore (especially in the presence of large concentration
of MIC) that the MMA formed due to the reaction of MIC with water will get quickly consumed and the rate of its reaction with MIC will be
dictated by its own availability which is governed by its reaction with water. The nonavailability of MIC-MMA rate data is therefore not a
serious handicap.

2.2 Additional data required for model estimations

literature (1,2) and can be summarised in the
form of following functional relationship for
MIC
10.425246
In Pvpr = 10.135656 - - - - - - -4.94905·
(5)

where P_v'Dt.. refers to the reduced vapour pressure of MIt; at temperature T>K and is defined
as Pvp/ Pc. where Pvp is the required vapour
pressure In atmospnere and Pc the critical
vapour pressure of MIC, reported to be 55 atm.
The reduced temperature Tr is likewise defined
as T/Tc and the critical temperature of MIC is
491 0 K. Equation (5) has been fitted to the
experimental vapour pressure-temperature data
for MIC and can be assumed to be valid over
the entire range from room temperature to critical temperature.

The vapour pressure-temperature data for
In the previous section we have summarised
chloroform
have been correlated by using the
the basic information regarding the rates of the
simple
relation
important processes. In addition, for the purpose of model building, we require information
3566.933
regarding the leakage rates etc. from the tank.
In
Pvp
=
1.669856
---(6)
The present section summarises this information
T
for use in the subsequent sections.
Data on common physical and thermophysical properties such as densities and specific heats
of the liquid reactants and products are readily
available in standard references. We additionally
need information regarding the heats of reaction.
These have been estimated by using the heats of
formation and other thermodynamic data. The
procedures used for estimation have been summarised in Appendix-I.
Among other properties of the reactant
mixture, the one of immediate concern to us
here relates to the pertinent vapour pressuretemperature relationship. Based on the analysis
and identification of chemical species present in
the tank, it is reasonable to expect MIC and
chloroform to predominantly contribute to the
vapour pressure exerted and it is important to
establish the vapour pressure-temperature curve
for this systems quantitatively. In addition
water-MIC reaction leads to the generation of
CO 2 , which will also contribute to the total
pressure in the tank.
The individual vapour pressure-temperature
data for the MIC and chloroform reported in the

where Pvp is in atm and T is OK.
In order to estimate the vapour pressure of
the mixture we invoke the assumption of ideal
(mixture and write the total pressure as a summation of the constituent parts as

(7)

where P refers to the total pressure, (pv )1 and
(Pvp )2 to vapour pressures of the MIC aEd chloroform, and Xl anrl x2 to the mole fractions of
MIC and chloroform in liquid at temperature
The gas phase mole fractions of the two
components are obviously related to the corresponding liquid phase mole fractions as

rroK.

y

p

p

These equations will be used for the estimation
of the quantities of MIC and chloroform present
in the vapour form.

69

