where A IS heat loss due to vaporisation of volatiles.

these vapours and the carbondlOxide gas. The
integration is continued untIl the time the
system reaches a pressure of 40 psi where the
valve is assumed to open allowing the system
to discharge.

Equation (11) describes the amount of C02
generated due to reaction. It should be noted
that rl represents the rate of C02 generation
measured In the units of litres of gas evolved per
It is noted that the safety valve has an enor·
unit time from a 100 m} volume of MIC. The mous capacity to leak out the gases and the
factor V cor is therefore incorporated to convert system pressure therefore suddenly falls when
it into proper units and that the actual volume the valve opens. The temperature of the system,
of the reacting MIC could be taken into account. however, remains relatively unchanged. This has
The extent of MIC reacted due to water and the important implications in that the liquid now
product MMA is described by equation (12). starts suddenly boiling which along with the
The factor b is introduced in this equation to generated C02 creates sufficient turbulence to
take care of the reactivity of MMA. In the pre- spread the reaction to larger volumes. The reacsent case we assume b value to be of the order tion that was restricted in the beginning to floatof unity. The last equation describing the temp- ing layer now spreads over to a larger volume.
erature variation takes into account the loss in The system quickly reaches the threshold presheat due to the vaporization of the volatile sure conditions and the valve opens. The model
materials such as MIC and chloroform. The func- described here now ceases to represent the situational relations used to describe the various rates tion realistically and additional considerations
and other parameters in these equations appear such as the extent of reaction volume and loss
in the programme listing that is appended at the due to leakage nc -,: to be incorporated to describe the real situation. The results of the first
end of this report.
phase description are presented in the form of
The set of equations have been numerically computer output at the end of this report.
integrated to obtain the amount of C02 evolved
as a function of time (see Figure 3), the amount Phase 2 Model
of MIC consumed at various stages during the
reaction, and the temperature of the reactive As discussed earlier, the model during this phase
medium. The vapour pressure-temperature rela- should describe the semi-continuous nature of
tions presented earlier have now been used to the system due to the continued outflow of
obtain the amounts of MIC and chloroform in material from the tank. The governing equations
the free space and the pressure exerted due to during this phase are:

deC'

2
CO

dy

(14 )

( O(vc ) - L

= r

2

-d (r·He )

dt

=

r

(eXv. ) + r
~

CO

MMA

( o{vc ) + 3 r

(O<"ot) - ~ e e k

(15)

tri

2

dT

1
=

dt

( - 4 H ) + br

r

1

CO

( - A H ) + 3r

MMA

2

(- A H ) -

tri

A

(16)

3

2
where L is the leak; a Vi and a Vt are the volume corrections of CO 2 and trimer, respectively.
72

