The model as described here has two distinctive features. As would be noted the model now
takes into account the additional trimerization
reaction. It may be appreciated that the large
extent of mixing caused due to bubbling of
generated C02 stirs up the reactant mass dispersing the potential catalysts such as Feel3 (assumed to be present due to corrosion of the tank
occuring over a long period of time) uniformly
through the mixture. As is known, excessive
heat liberation contributes to the rise in the
temperature of the liquid. The volume correction factors associated with the rate terms in
equations (14) and (15) take into account the
extent of reaction volume, where the individual
reaction proceeds and also converts the rates
into proper units.

The set of equations (14)-(16) have been
numerically integrated subject to the appropriate initial conditions that are derived from the
analysis of the first phase. This enables one to
estimate the moles of C02, amount of MIC consumed due to each one of the reactions, the
temperature and the amount of material lost
through the vent. It is possible in these calculations to keep an account of the amount of MIC
consumed due to the individual reactions and its
loss through the vent. The instantaneous temperature of the reactive medium has been used to

calculate the extent of volatiles and the pressure
exerted due to them in the system. The numerical procedure adopted will be clear from the
form of the computer output at the end of this
report.
As would be noticed, the water being the
limiting component, it gets consumed during the
course of the reaction. The MIC-MMA reaction
being faster than the MIC-water reaction also
comes to an end. It should be noted, however,
that the reactions between MIC and other MMA
based products and the trimerization reaction
continues. The model during the second phase
now becomes invalid and we have to move over
to the next phase to take care of the subsequent
events.

Phase 3 Model
It is assumed that during this phase the MIC-

water and MIC-MM~' reaction can be neglected.
The only predominant reaction during this phase
is therefore the trimerization. Other reactions
such as those leading to MIC reactions with
other MMA based products also cc.ntinue. We
assume them to be negligibly small in extent. We
feel that these can be incorporated, if desired,
by using some effective rate expression. The
model during this phase can thus be describ~d as

-d ("He)
::

dt
di

C<Vi.

-

l

{17 }

trim

1
::

dt

-3r

vee

[

(-AH)-A
trim
3

(18 )

p

The results of the numerical integration during highlight the main findings of the results of thE
this phase are also presepted as computer out- present model.
puts at the end of this repC?rt.
5.4 IMPORTANT RESULTS OF
It should be noted that models in phase 1 to
TH E ANALYSIS
phase 3 follow in succession and time parameters appearing in these models run conti- In phase 1 the major contribution to the buildnuously. This is essential since calculations per- up of pressure in the system seems to have been
taining to parameters such as the various rate caused due to the generation of C02' During
functions, the contributions of the leak terms this phase, it may be recollected that the reacand heat loss and generation terms are based on tion begins in localised zones the extent of
the absolute value of the time parameter. The which is arbitrarily chosen by assigning values to
functional relations for all these parameters are the parameter Vcor. Several numerical runs with
listed in the programme listing. We shall now different values of this parameter were execut-

74

