The present model seems to be qualitatively erature rose due to the adiabatic condItions in a
and (and in some cases quantitatively) consistent highly exothermic reaction. This continued until
with description of the events that is document- the water got exhausted. Subsequently the
ed in general reports. It also establishes useful temperature was sustained by trimerisation reacbounds on the ranges of temperatures and pres- tion alone and the rest of the MIC was vented
sures that might have been reached during the off.
event in the accident tank. It is worthwhile recalling here that the mechanical and metallurgiAs per the present model, the trimerization
cal testing of the tank material indicated that reaction has played a significant role in causing
the tank was not subjected to pressures exceed- the subsequent leakage. It is interesting to coning 200 psi and temperatures exceeding 250 o C. jecture as to what would have happened if such
These limits are consistent with model calcula- rapid trimerisation had not occurred. In other
tion. In addition, the model predicts a loss of words, we can predict as to what would have
about 28 tons of material from the tank (Figure happened if the contamination due to FeelS
5). The extent of trimer formed also corres- (presumably due to the prior corrosion of the
ponds to the amounts determined from the resi- tank) did not exist. The model results for this
due analysis.
case can be computed. The predictions are
shown in Figure 6. As can be seen, the pressure
In view of the general agreement of the pre- build up is not sustained. Also the total MIC
dicted results with the actual observations in the leakage is comparatively smaller. The main
tank, the following stages can be envisaged. The damage, therefore, seems to have been caused by
initial pressure build up in the tank was due to the prior corros:"'I of the tank, which makes
the evolution of C02 in the first phase. The FeCla catalyst available for the reaction and
vigorous reaction during the second phase caus- made it possible to reach an almost autocatalytic
ed a sudden increase in pressure and the temp- like catastrophic state.

76

