REPORT OF WORK ON
MIC DECOMPOSITION STUDIES

1.0 Background

ii) Trimerisation

540 Btuflb of MIC

The scientific studies on the factors related to
the Bhopal toxic gas leakage persented in the
CSIR report of December (1985), though concise, embodies the results of (i) a chemical study
on the tank residue and the reactions of MIC
and (il) an exhaustive analysis of the design
features and facilities for the manufacture of
MIC, its storage, utilization and disposal at the
Bhopal plant. It establishes that a combination
of conditions for the occurrence of the mishap
already existed in the plant, due to the lack of
en'gineering features commensurate in proportion to the properties of explosive reactivity,
ready volatility and high inhalation toxicity of
MIC. From the chemical analysis of the tank
residue and the chemistry of the formation of
products, it has been deduced that (i) the
temperature of the tank should have reached
250 0 C causing the pressure in the tank to rise
to around 11·13 kg/cm 2g, (ii) there should
have been an ingress of at least 500 kg of water
initiating the reaction and activating the metal
contaminants and (iii) there should have been an
intrusion of sodium hydroxide to account for
the quantity of sodium present in the tank
residue.
While the report undoubtedly demonstrated
that there was no formation of hydrogen cya·
nide during the pyrolysis of MIC or its reaction
products, an analysis of the gaseous products
was much desired. With this requirement in
view, a few experiments have been carried out
primarily for gas analysis and simultaneously for
the product analysis to see if any further insight
into the reaction could be gained.

(iii) Reaction with
water

585 Btu/lb of MIC,
3700 Btu/lb of water

Considering the heat of reaction with water, it
may be seen that every kg of water reacting
with 6.33 kg of MIC will liberate 2051.28
Kcals of heat sufficient ~o vapourise 16.59 kg of
MIC at ambient temp. and atmospheric pressure.
In other words, water added to an extent of
4.36 (W%) in MIC can cause the vapourisation of
the entire quantity of MIC taken. If the trimerisation reaction is considered, the heat
liberated for every kg of trimer formed is
equivalent to the vapourisation of 7.3 kg of
MIC. For the reaction involving DMI formation, heat produced by the formation of one kg
of DMI will evaporate 2.78 kg of MIC. Though
the reaction with water at room temperature is
slow, the heat produced accelerates the reaction
rapidly. The trimerisation reaction is violent,
but has an induction period depending upon the
catalyst. The DMI formation takes place only
above 2000 C. From the December (1985 )
report, it may be seen that the trimerisation
reaction is the major reaction producing the
maximum heat, enough to evaporate 50,590
kg of MIC, followed by the reaction with water
and the DMI formation (heat equivalent is
8494 kg and 7442.6 kg of MIC respectively).
So the water quantity for the reactions under
study are taken in the rmige 3·8 (W%).
The second factor considered was the content of chloroform in the MIC stored in tank
610. December (1985) report shows that chlorc>form has no influence whatsoever in initiating
or accelerating the run away reactions. Chloroform was responsible for the formation () f
2.0 Factors considered
dione which takes place above 200 0 C and wa..s
Firstly the heats of reactions were taken into estimated to be 595 kg from the tank residu.e
consideration. The values for the common analysis. This works o~ut to 5% based on the
MIC used up in the reaction (12,087 kg) aIld
reactions of MIC are:
1.45% on the total quantity of MIC present iD
i) Polymerisation
345 Btu/lb of MIC the tank (41,338 kg). The VCC report !>f
103

