March (1985) states that the last discharges
of MIC from MIC refining still to tank 610
contained chloroform to an extent of 12-16%.
Taking this into account, one can arrive at a
conclusion that chloroform was present in
the MIC in the tank 610 to an extent of
3.608·4.8%. There is no room to assume more
than 5% of CHClg content in the MIC of tank
610. So the chloroform concentrations for the
experiments were chosen in the range 3 to 6
(W%).

Experiments with different proportions of
water and chloroform in the selected ranges
were carried out and the data are given in
Tables· 1-4.
3.0 Preliminary Studies
The GeMS of the commercial sample (Fluka
1977) used in the reactions showed besides
MIC, chloroform present as stabilizer and a
small amount of dimer which readily reverts
to MIC.
The mass spectrum of MIC by liquid inlet
system was identical with the above and a fragment ion peak corresponding to m/z 27 (HCN)
shows up in both, indicating that MIC fragments
to HCN on electron impact.
Pyrolysis of plain MIC at 250°C for 2 hours
has carried out in a couple of experiments and
the gases collected showed on GeMS, no other
components except MIC and the fragment ion
peak m/z 27 which was less than 2% in intensity.
The peaks at m/z 83 and 85 observed represent
CHC1 35 + and CHC135 Cl37 + arising from the
2
stabilizer. The solid residue showed the presence
of only one product, the trimer (MICT) with M+
1 71 and matching in all respects with an authentic sample of MICT.
Application of GeMS was tried to identify
the gaseous products as well as the solids produced in the pyrolysis of MIC with water and
with water-chloroform mixtures. Table 1 sum..
marises the experiments carried out and the
results obtained. It may be seen that all the
major products are identified in the solids
formed. But in the case of the gas analysis, only
carbon dioxide was identified. Vitiated by the
high concentration of carbon dioxide, the presence or absence of other constituents could
not be established in GCMS. Therefore, it was
decided to use GC for subsequent experiments.

4.0 Pyrolysis Studies
Pyrolysis of MIC in presence of water and water104

chloroform mixtures were carried out in a
specially made bomb, with provision for coHee·
tion of gases after the experiment. The bomb
is a stainless steel cylinder closed at one end and
fitted at the other end with a screw cap and
needle valve which could withstand a pressure of
204 atmospheres. Provision for inserting a thermocouple for measuring the inside temperature
was made. The general procedure is to charge
the material by volume in the order, MIC chloroform-water and quickly closed the end
securely. Then the cylinder is heated electrically
to the desired temperature and maintained at
that temperature for two hours. Finally the
cylinder is withdrawn from the heater and allowed to cool in a well-ventilated hood. When
the inside temperature has fallen to 1000C,
gase; are collected in an evacuated gas collector tube and taken for gas analysis by GC. The
cylinder was allowed to cool to 200 C and the
solids removed from the reactor by leaching
with methanol. After evaporating methanol,
the solids are analybeJ by GC.
Table 2 gives the experimental conditions
and table 3 gives the results of gas analysis.
Table 4 gives the composition of products in
the acetone extract.
The presence of amine in the gaseous products in the experiment 9 was recognised but
the individual identification was not possible
due to insufficient quantity of the gas mixture.
In experiment 10, the presence of trimethyl
amine was confirmed. Other amines are either
absent or below the level of detection by the
present procedure. Subsequently, in all the rest
of the experiments, trimethyl amine was found
to be present. One additional peak from experiment 14 to 17, which was found to be neutral
by chemical treatment was identified as being
due to carbon monoxide.
5.0 Inferences and Discussion
The detection of carbon monoxide in the
gaseous products of experiments 14·17 is an
important observation. But it is not surprising
because of the presence of chloroform and water
in the reaction. December (1985) report describes two experiments (13 and 18) on the
hydrolysis of chloroform to formic acid by
water at 200°C. There are instances in literature that report the formation of formic acid
and hydrochloric acid from chloroform and
water. Thus formic acid could give rise to carbon monoxide. Alternatively, the origin of
carbon monoxide can be traced to the reaction

