of formic acid with MIC to form the anhydride
which decomposes thermally to carbon monomethyl amine. This
xide, carbon dioxide
sequence can be confIrmed experimentally.
Whatever be the route Qf formation of carbon
monoxide, the source seems to be formic
acid and not methyl isocynate or its reaction
products, since carbon monoxide was detectable only in experiments involving chloroform.
Another significant observation is the
detection of trimethyl amine in the gaseous
products of all experiments irrespective of
whether chloroform is added or not. December
(1985) report suggested that the formation of
trimethyl amine was associated with the formation of DMI as in Eq. 10 (P. 58) and this was
used in the material balance calculations. The
current observation justifies this suggestion,
since it lends support for the associated formation of trimethyl amine and DMI. Eq. 10 was
derived as a continuation of Eq. 7 (P. 58)
assuming the intermediacy of trimethyl urea
(TMU, Eq. 8, P. 58) and tetramethyl biuret
(TRMB, Eq. 9, P. 57). That this approach is
rational gets established by the evidence trended
by experiments 43 and 47 carried out on TMU.
The results are reproduced below:

anF

is formed from TRMB and that TMA is an
essential co-product, the identification of which
in the present experiments confirms the above
reaction sequence.
Similarly the formation of DMA can be
by the
sequence
reasonably formulated
0
~ DMU ~IC ... TMB~DMA +
2MIC H2
HNCO MIC .. DMA + DMI and then the branching ~t DMA can be envisaged as above. The
evidence for this sequence comes from the
decomposition reactions of TMB. The typical
example of experiment 29 is cited below:

Expt 29:

TMB + CHCla, 2450 C, 45 min.
TMU (2.5), DMU(40, MICT(6.1),
TMB(4.0) DMI(9.3), Dione (1.7)

The major product is DMU and it is evident that
TMB formed at lower temperatures reverts back
at higher temperatures to DMU and MIC, from
which MIC undergoes other reactions. The
formation of DMI as the next abundant product
indicates that a portion of TMB breaks up into
DMA, HNCO and MIC from which TMU, TMU
based products, DM! and MICT are formed.
Thus there is ample ground for concluding that
DMA and TMA are formed in the thermal
Expt 43: TMU + CHCla + MIC, 2150 C,
decompositions of MIC reaction products.
45 min. _----"~~
The suggestion that the mixture of amine
TMU(10),DMU(I.4),MICT(46.5),
hydrochlorides could arise from the disproTMB(a.4), TRMB(I.!7), DMI(12.0),
portion of methylamine hydrochloride at
Dione (1.6)
elevated temperatures as put forward in the
UC report of March (1985) is untenable because
Expt 47: TMlJ + CHela, 220o C, 40 min._~>~ of the presence of abundant quantities of MIC.
TMU (64),DMU(13), TetMU
Moreover, it is known that methylamine formed
(present)
even at lower temperatures is quickly fixed
up as DMU, the magnitude of the heat of this
reaction has been discussed earlier in this report.
Expt 47 indicates that chloroform has no role
"Having arrived at a logical sequence of major
to play in the decomposition of TMU. The reactions, a material balance was worked out
reaction is one of exchange of amine groups at and presented in Annexure 1. TMU formation
high temperatures, as is usual with methylated was taken as per the present scheme which is
urease The products are obviously DMU and different from that adopted by the report of
tetramethyl urea. In contrast, the decomposi- December (1985). Despite this change, the
tion of TMU in presence of MIC as in Expt 43 material balance remains to be the same.
produces DMI as the second abundant product
Analysis of the acetone soluble residues by
and TRMB to an extent of 1.7%. This implies GC (Table 4) shows the usual trends such as
that TRMB is formed as an intermediate only (i) the formation of more DMU and less MICT
to decompose to TMA, MIC and HNCO which with increasing quantities of water and (ii) the
lead to the formation of DMI. The conversion formation of more dione with more chloroform.
sequence DMA~ TMU ~TRMB-'TMA The poor formation of DMI is intriguing, but it
+ HNCO "MIC. TMA + DMI gets established by suggests that pressure has to be considered as
this evidence. Linking this sequence with Eq.7 an important parameter. In experiment 14,
(P.57), one obtains the Eq. 10 which seems to the reactant concentration is held close to the
be fairly correct. It is to be noted that HNCO ratio arrived at by the material balance calcula] 09

