DESIGN AND ENGINEERING EFFORTS

Introduction· Why RRLH was called to ueIL
The Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabao,
(RRLH) is the only institution of CSIR which
deals with process design and engineering of
chemical process plants. As such the DGSIR,
called upon RRLH scientists to associate themselves very closely with the operation at Vnion
Carbide India Limited (UCIL), Agricultural
Products Division, Bhopal.
RRL(H) is also "the only institute in CSIR
which has developed a process for the manufacture of phosgene, a very toxic chemical
used in the manufacture of intermediates
including methyl isocyanate (MIC), and toluene
diisocyanate. Scientists at RRLH have designed, fabricated, installed and operated a pilot
plant for making 120 Kg of phosgene per day.
The process was successfully demonstrated
to Hindustan Organic Chemicals, a public
sector undertaking, and hence RRLH had acquired considerable experience in safety /handling of toxic materials at sufficiently larger
scale.
RRLH has, over a period of several years,
designed and commissioned industrial plants
for the manufacture of pesticides based on the
process know-how developed by the laboratory.
This activity involves design of systems for
receiving, handling and storage of toxic and
inflammable materials. Process design and
instrumentation, of all hazardous operations
forms a part of this activity. Consequently,
the scientists at RRLH are very well aware of
this standard procedures to be adopted in investigating any hazard. Incorporation of most
appropriate safety devices and safe disposal
of toxic and inflammable materials during an
unforeseen emergencies is conceived at the
design stage at RRLH.
Finally, intensive interaction between the
chemists, chemical engineers and mechanical
engineers during the development of process
technology for agro-chemicals has resulted in
a unique orientation of the personnel involvement in various disciplines and a high level of
competency.

2. DETAILS OF THE INVOLVEMENT OF
RRLH IN veIL CASE:
2.1 At veIL Premises:
(Summary of Visit Reports compiled by RRLH
scientists after their visits to VCIL, APD plant
is enclosed as Appendix I)

1. Scientists from RRLH were among the
first to reach VCIL after the incident on
2/3 Dec 1984 resulting in the release of
large quantities of MIC. They were associated with many critical assignments which
were completed during the first few weeks
including the following:
a) Assessment of hazard resulting from
the presence of approx. 20 tonnes of
MIC on VCIL premises.
b) Evaluation of methods for stabilising

left over MIC for its safe disposal.
c) Scrutiny of procedures available, for
safe disposal of MIC.
d) Inspection of plant and equipment
available at UCIL to undertake the
operation.
e) Evaluation of 'Zero-risk' procedure for
the disposal.
f)

Determination of the quality of MIC
vis-a-vis the risk involved in its disposal.

g) Preparation for and participation in
"Operation Faith".
h) Coordination of activities of personnel
of various agencies during the operation.
i)

Technical assessment of the causes of
the incident.

j)

Preliminary checking of designs of
critical equipment earmarked for use
during "Operation Faith".

115

