2. Subsequent visits were made to DCIL to tank were critically scrutinized and a separate
assist the Scientific Team of the Govern- note on this aspect was submitted to CSIR.
ment of India in sampling the residue in
Tank 610 and analysis of residue samples. .2 Public Relations & Publicity
More details are provided in Appendix II,
Section 1.1, and Section 2 where details CSIR Headquarters was the centre of actiof the operation are given.
vities for a number of months after the incident. Technical journals like the Chemical &
3. Decontamination of MIC structure was
Engineering News sent their representatives
one of the most important assignments
to obtain information on the incident as
in which engineers from RRLH were closely
well as the follow-up action taken. Such
involved. Representatives of the Ministry
visitors had to be taken to various places in
of Chemicals and Fertilizers were advised
India accompanied by Scientists with intimate
about the validity and suitability of proknowledge of the UCIL case. RRLH Scientists
cedures suggested by UCIL.
very often performed these tasks.
Very often during the period follOwing the
4. The Attorney's finn Robin Zelle Larson
incident, the Senior Scientists of CSIR were
and Kaplan (RZLK) hired by Government
asked to present their views in the national
of India in VSA deputed their represen- and international seminars, .symposia. Material
tatives to visit the VCIL plant and get required for presentation had been prepared
aquainted with MIC plant. Their visit was by Scientists of RRLH to suit the requirements
organised and a get together was arranged of the particular forum without digressing
for them to meet all the scientists involved too much and with due regard to the legal
in the DelL case (Please see Appendix II aspects of the case.
Section 4).
Scientists of RRLH visited RZLK in 1. OPERATIONS IN BHOPAL
USA to assist them in preparing technical
Sampling
part of the legal documents. Visit Reports 1.1
of the scientists may be referred to for
1.1.1 During the Operation Faith the thermofurther details.
well nozzle of tank 610 was opened. Arrange ..
ments were made for evacuating any volatile
2.2
Outside UCIL
and gaseous substances from this nozzle by
having a cold trap to condense the material.
1 Engineering Aspects of veIL Plant
After ascertaining that no volatile or gaseous
products were found at this location, the naWith the expertise generated as a consequence zzle was used for withdrawing solid residue
of design and engineering activities, RRLH samples. These samples were collected by CBI
scientists were called upon to look closely at under the guidance of Dr S Varadarajan,
the overall design of MIC plant and analyse Director-General, CSIR. One set of samples
the reasons for the failure of process instru- was given to uec team.
mentation and control systems. Several discussions were held at RRLH and some of the 1.1,2 The M.P. High court through an order,
conclusions drawn up are presented in Appen- decided that samples of MIC (tank 611) collectdix III.
ed earlier and remnants of tank 610 be analysed
It was also possible to draw a comparison by a team of scientists from CSIR in the prebetween the UCL's own plant at USA and VCIL sence of an independent expert to be nominated.
Bhopal plant based upon the press statements by DGSIR. The DGSIR in turn requested Dr.
made by ueL. Engineering features and safety C S P Iyer, Head, Analytical Division, Bhabha
aspects of the two units were highlighted in Atomic Research Centre, Bombay to provide
a note filed with CSIR.
the expertise. The DGSIR has also nominated
A detailed review of the Report compiled Dr N R Ayyangar, Scientist, NCL, Pune, to be
by VCL in March 1985 was carned out with in-charge of all analytical work pertaining to
respect to the design and engineering.
the court order.
Similarly the Emergency Procedure prescribed by VCIL and venting system of MIC 1.1.3 During the second week of February

116

