1985, a team consisting of the above named
scientists and others who were concerned with
Operation Faith finalised a sampling procedure
and a sampling schedule at Bhopal. Accordingly,
it was decided to withdraw residue samples from
tank 610 using 5 process/instrumentation
nozzles available on the manhole cover representatives of CBI as well as UCIL (as representative of VCC, USA). From each of the 5
sampling nozzles residue samples were drawn
and one such set comprising of all 5 samples
was handed over to VCIL for UCC. The other
set was taken to NCL for investigative analysis.

1.2

Decontamination of MIC Structure

1.2.1 During the month of April 1985, the
CBI was asked by the M.P. Government to
make arrangements for decontaminating the
MIC structure to enable closure of the UCIL
premises by 11th July 1985. Although a list
of all toxic and hazardous chemicals was prepared as early as in January 1985 and some
action was already taken, it was felt that decontamination of process equipment in the
MIC structure should be dealt with very carefully. The CBI was, therefore, asked to get a
procedure for decontamination of MIC struc1.1.4 While the samples of the residue were ture from UCIL for examination by the scienbeing collected, it was felt by Dr C S P lyer tists of Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers,
as well as others that the material withdrawn Government of India and CSIR.
in this fashion would not perhaps give a total
picture of all the components remaining and 1.2.2 This procedure was thoroughly exathe distribution in the entire tank 610. This mined at Bhopal by asking pertinent questions
observation was made as a result of the loca- about the relevant procedures. Subsequently
tion of the manhole which is situated at one some modifications were made to the proceend of the tank which is 40' long. It was, there- dures supplied by UCIL and clearance was
fore, decided that a more comprehensive samp- given to CBI to start the work.
les from the tank so that any variation of the
composition of the residue along the aDs as 1.2.3 Representatives of the Ministry of
well as lateriy can be accounted. The eBI was Chemicals and Fertilisers, Government of
requested to arrange for excavation of tank 610 India, supervised the start-up of operation.
as early as possible so that suitable sampling The operation was completed successfully
windows can be cut at various locations on eventhough there was leethal MIC related
the tank for withdrawal of samples.
contaminants in the various systems. The
plant was subsequently shut down on the
1.1.5 In the first week of April 1985 Dr 11th July 1985.
e P Iyer, along with other scientists from
eSIR and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertili- 2.
MIC analysis at Bhopal
sers, Government of India and Mr L H Baker
of uee gathered at UCIL, Bhopal, to implement
2.1
Samples of MIC collected during Operathe revised sample plan.
tion Faith from tank 611 under the supervision
1.1.6 Tank 610 was cut open at four locations on the 7 segmented tank as follows:
i)

The dished end at the far end of the
tank

il)

On segments 4 & 6 at the top

iii)

On segments 4 & 4 on the side

1.1. 7 Solid residue samples were collected
from all the four locations and one set of
each was handed over to uec, UCIL and CSIR'
It was discovered during the sampling that
the earlier samples (withdrawn in February
1985) might not have been representative
as the total depth of the residue was found
to be much more throughout the tank.

of CBI were analysed during February 1985
at Bhopal by a team of scientists from eSIR.
For this purpose, facilities available at UCIL
Research Centre were utilised. However, chemists and analysts employed by the Regional
Research Laboratory, Bhopal (CSIR) worked
under the supervision of Dr N R Ayyangar,
Scientist, NCL, Pune, to complete the analysis. Dr C S P lyer of BARe was also present.
2.2
Trace metal analysis of the non-volatile
residue of MIC samples was carried out by Dr
N R Ayyangar and Dr e S P Iyer at Defence
Metallurgical Research Laboratories, Hyderabad,
and Nuclear Fuel complex, Hyderabad.
2.3
The results of all the analysis were compiled and sent to DGSIR.
117

