3.

Investigative analysis at NCL, Pune

the Madhya Pradesh State Government officials
of the Medical and Health, Public Administra3.1
The samples of MIC withdrawn by CBI tion, Social Service and Law Ministries. R,Z,
from various locations during the Operation L & K had an opportunity to get to know the
Faith were taken to NCL for complete analysis. dimensions of the problems of relief operaThe results were passed on to CBI.
tion and the kind of records which are available with M.P. State Government, Subsequently,
3.2
The residue samples withdrawn from members of the team proceeded to VeIL
tank 610 in February 1985 and April 1985 plant and spent several hours understanding
(referred to in section 1.1) were transferred the sequence of events and the equipment
to NCL for complete analysis. Since the ma- involved in the incident.
terial contains a number of components, some
of which are difficult to identify, a comphre- 4.3
Towards the end of May 1985, a team
hensive programme of analytical work has been consisting of Mr B A Finzen and Mr L Zelle
drawn up. This includes identification of each visited Bhopal. This time, Dr P V Krishna,
component by the most modem analytical Adviser, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilitechniques such as Mass Spectrometry, Infrared sers, Dr A A Khan, Scientist, RRL, HyderaSpectrometry, HPLC, Column Chromotography, bad, accompanied the lawyers to Bhopal.
etc.
After meeting the state government officials,
Mr Zelle and Mr Finzen spent time with the
3.3
The programme also involves preparation scientific tem which was entrusted with the
of ultra pure compounds of the required chemi- job of neutralising MIC during Operation Faith
cal structure in order to identify corresponding and the job of follow-up action at Bhopal.
molecules available in the residue sample. A The Additional Director, CBI, Mr G Ramateam of several senior scientists has been en- chandran as well as Superintendent of Police
trusted with this jo b and the work is in progress. of CBI in-charge of the investigations at Bhopal,
Mr. Murari Lal were also consulted by R, Z, L &

4.

Visits of R,Z,L & K teams

4.1
A team consisting of the following
R,Z,L & K Attorneys visited the UCIL plant
towards the end of March 1985 in order to
gather first hand infonnation on the disaster
as well as to get acquainted with the relief
measures taken immediately after the disaster.
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)

Mr M V Cireci
Mr B A Finzen

Ms R B Walburn
Ms A Barcelow

4.2
Dr G Thyagarajan, Director, RRL,
Hyderabad, Dr P V Krishna, Adviser, Ministry
of Chemicals and Fertilisers, Government of
India, Dr A A Khan, Scientist, RRL, Hyderabad, accompanied the R,Z,L & K team to
Bhopal. Discussions were organised between

118

K.

4.4
Dr G Thyagarajan,
Director, RRL,
Hyderabad, had organised a get-together at
Hyderabad of all the scientists working on
various aspects of Bhopal gas leak disaster.
Mr Finzen and Mr Zelle were taken to Hyderabad to discuss all technical matters concerning
the disaster with these individuals. The gettogether was spread over two days during
which intensive discussions were held between
the R,Z, L & K team and the scientists on
various aspects including the design and operation of MIC plant, safety systems available at
UCIL, sequence of events leading upto this
incident, the UCIL report on Bhopal incident
investigation published in March 1985, the
observations made during Operation Faith,
the role of various scientists and engineers
during Operation Faith, various probable causes
of the incident, legal proceedings in US courts
etc.

