7. A consignment of 44 samples was recovered
and thorough washing of the Vent Gas Scrubfrom CBI custody and 400 of these, consistber system, draining of PVH and RVVH in
ing of core (residue) material, solid deposits
presence of CBI and Min. of Chemicals (MCF)
in pipe lines etc, water drained from RVVH,
Team.
liquid collected from PSV downstream, line
on MIC Tank 611 on 13.3.85 etc, were hand- 2. Various 'Scenarios' proposed by MCF team
which individually or in combination might
ed over to MG Sane of NCL from taking them
have resulted in the release of MIC were
Pune. 4 residue samples (Series C) will be
examined. Among the process areas which
taken to RRL, Hyderabad.
came for in-depth discussion were MMA storage area, vapouriser, and pre-heated, pyrolyVisit Report No.4
zer accumulator, caustic back up for VGC,
and Off space MIC. In each case engineering
1. Five sampling windows measuring approximadocuments eg, P & I diagrams etc, were used
tely 12"x12" square or 12" dia circle were
and the process equipment and piping was
cut open in the SS Tank 610 for withdrawing
inspected at site.
Core samples in the presence of representatives of UCC, DelL and CBI.
2. The inside of tank 610 was video filmed
Visit report No.7
through one of the sampling windows.
3. Samples of residue were withdrawn from all
the windows and the manhole, identified and 1. Metals samples of the wall of Tank 611 were
marked, not identified and sealed for further
sealed in appropriate bottles. Sampling winexamination.
dows were sealed properly afterwards to avoid
any ingress of moisture.
2. Tank 611 remains in good shape - no distortions were noticed on close examination.
3.
Detailed measurements were taken of Tank
Visit Report No. 5
610 to determine the extent of deformation
of the tank between the stiffening rings and
1. Mr Bruce Finzen and Mr. Lawrence Zelle
outside.
belonging to the Lawyers Ill'm Robin, Zelle,
3.
Video film of phosgene filters, 6" R VVH
Larson and Kaplan (RZLK), who have been
isolation
valve near the filters, service drops
entrusted with the legal aspects of UCIL case
behind
MIC
storage area, GBB header, proby the Government of India, visited the UCIL
and
instrumentation
nozzles of Tank
cess
plant. They were given full description of the
619
were
taken
by
CBI.
MCF
team provided
events leading upto the Dec'84 incident of
the
commentary.
MIC. Various technical queries raised by them
were also answered.
2. Amounts of chloroform and phosgene present
in MIC of Tank 610 were worked out from
the data on analysis of plant samples.
Visit Report No.6
1. Decontamination procedures pertaining to
MIC structure and proposed by UCIL, were
examined with the help of documents available at UCIL. Discussions were also held with
UCIL personnel to seak certain clarifications.
The decontamination procedures were cleared
subject to certain conditions, e.g., complete

120

Visit Report No.8

1. Tank 610 which was involved in the incident
releasing large quantities of MIC, was lifted
on a trailer taken to a weighing bridge,
weighed. and brought back. to the position
previously occupied by 611.
2. Supervision of the above operation was
mainly carried out by engineers from ElL
Delhi. Assistance was rendered in coordinating the work between UeIL, CBI and
Government of India'5 scientific team deputed to Bhopal to oversee the operations.

