APPENDIX III
CONFIDENTIAL

(From: Dr. G. Thyagarajan
DRRL-H)

ENGINEERING ASPECTS OF UCIL PLANT

Mechanical Design:

1. Manhole entry is not as per ASME Code.
The clearance available through the manhole
is less than 300 mm.
2. No insulation is provided for the tank which
is supposed to contain MIC at sub-ambient
temperature. A 30ton chiller is inadefquMaltce
for the load. Providing for chilling 0
without insulating the tank serves no purpose.
.
3. No provision is made for free/unres~lcted
access to the inside of the tank for Inspection/contingencies.
4. Relief valve vent header of MIC storage
should have been separately routed to the
vent gas scrubber instead of connecting it to
RVVH of the MIC plant.
Vent Relief & Safe Disposal:

1. If the contents of any of the storage tanks
are inadvertently contaminated with water,
and the contamination is manifested by a
rise in temperature or pressure, no backup
system has been provided for unloading and
safe disposal of the contents.
2. Vent gas scrubber (VGS) can take initially
40 gpm of liquid MIC for first 30 min. and
subsequently 9 gpm only when the temperature rises to 70oC. this is equivalent to only
2 tonnes per hour. Hence VGS is not designed to cope with relief valve vent header
(RVVH) loads.
3. Transfer of MIC between tanks has to be
carried out manually which is a tedious and
time consuming operation.
4. Safety relief valve is designed for handling
vapour only, whereas during an emergency
both liquid and vapour enter the line generating excessive back pressure.

5. VGS is located approx. 350 ft away from
the MIC storage area with the intervening
pipe line with no vapour-liquid disengagement chamber/vessel.
Maintenance Pxactice:
1. RVVH is cleaned by purging with water,

thereby increasing the possibility of water
entering into the MIC storage tanks speedily
when PVH is interconnected to RVVH.
2. Removal and replacement of rupture disc is
possible only after isolation of the tank.
During this period the tank has no safety
device on it.
3. No provision is made for cleaning the process pipe connecting downstream of N2
bleed valve to process vent header (PVH).
4. No provision is made for cleaning the nonreturn valve on nitrogen inlet line.
Process Instrumentation:

1. The type of level indicating system selected
is not suitable for MIC as it gets clogged with
solid.
2. The "Pressure high" alarm was not operative.
(Please check from records).
3. The PVH nitrogen bleed valve has a narrow
aperture (orifice) which is susceptible to
clogging by solids.

These comments by consensus of:
Dr
Mr
Mr
Dr
Dr
Dr

Asad Ali Khan
S Koteswara Rao
M 'Anandam
Nagabhushan Rao
U T Bhalerao, and
G Thyagarajan

123

