It was reported that the dished end was made of
304 stainless steel (composition limits: Mn 2%
max, Cr 18-20%, Ni 8-11%) and the barrel made
of 316 stainless steel (composition limits: Mn
max, Cr 16-18%, Ni 10-14%, Mo 2-3%). If the
plates WB and WE (taken from the barrel) are
of 316 stainless steel, then the observed molybdenum content in these samples is less than that
for material of that specification.
The colourless deposit in tank 610 was
found to contain dimethyl urea, trimethyl
biuret, trimethyl cyanurate and some hydrolysable chloride. Besides it showed presence
of nickel, chromium, iron and traces of calcium
and sodium. The tenacious deposit in tank
610 was found to contain C,N,O and chloride.
The plates from tank 611 sent to NAL,
shown in Fig. 4, exhibit a few brownish patches.
These patches appear to be rust.
SCANNING ELECTRON ~ICROSCOPY

After removal of the deposit with organic solvents and ultrasonic cleaning, the inner surface
of both types of plates from both the tanks was
found to be pitted. Fig. 5 to 8 show shallow
pits on the inner surface of the plates, taken
in a scanning electron microscope.
METALLOGRAPHY

Metallographic examination of the inner surface

130

as well as the transverse section of the samples
was carried out. Fig. 9 and 10 show the microstructures of samples taken from tanks 610
and 611. The inner surface of the plates indicates equiaxed grains with twins characteristic of
annealed material. The transverse section of the
samples shows a banded structure, as seen in
Fig. 9(a), 9(e), lO(a) and 10(e) which is not
uncommon in rolled plate material.

DISCUSSION
Metallography of the stainless steel plates from
both the tanks reveals only normal microstructure. In such stainless steel, microstructural
changes will be perceptible only if the material
is exposed to temperatures above 650°C. Further, plates of tank 610 exhibited normal
hardness values v~t~, no variation along the
thickness. This indicates that the inner surface
of the plates has not experienced temperatures
high enough to soften the material. On the
external surface of tank 610 there is no evidence
by bitumen burning. Even the soil was loose.
without any consolidation or sintering. From
these considerations it is concluded that the
interior of the tank 610 could not have experienced any temperature higher than about
650°C.

