BIO-DEGRADATIONAL AND ANTI-CHLOLINESTERASE ACTIVITIES
OF METHYL ISOCYANATE IN
AQUATIC ENVIRONMENTS OF BHOPAL

the aquatic organisms as well. We attempted to
estimate in both. The normal range of AChE
A team of three scientists of NIO (Dr. R. Sen activities in freshwater food fishes is not clearly
Gupta, Dr. A. Sarkar and Mr. T.W. Kureishy) known. We, therefore, collected a few samples
initiated a study, three weeks after the leakage of the same species of fishes from a MIC-unconof methyl isocyanate (MIC) gas, in the environ- taminated environment, and analysed them for
ments of Bhopal. The study was confined to the mono-methylamine and AChE activities· to esexamination of the end-products of degradation tablish their normal ranges. We used these values
of MIC in aquatic environments by analysing as reference standards.
water and fish samples from the Upper and the
There are two lakes at Bhopal. One of them,
Lower Lakes. Besides, a few blood samples were the Upper Lake, is the source of water supply to
collected from a representative age group of the city and is quite far away from the Union
affected persons of the gas leakage and the plas- Carbide factory, the source of MIC pollution.
ma was analysed for acetylcholinesterase (AChE) The other one, the Lower Lake, is very close to
activity.
the factory, smaller in area and is completely
The initial data indicated tTiat there might be eutrophicated.
some long term influence in some fishes and, of
course, in human beings. No data on the same SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS
components, collected earlier from the same environment, were available to compare our results The period of collections of the first set of samwith and to examine the eventual effects. We, ples was from 23 to 30 December 1984. Water
therefore, planned a monitoring programme for samples were collected, using a Niskin PVC
a period of six month with bi-monthly observa- water sampler, from various depths of the Lower
tions. Data were collected during the last weeks Lake. Due to technical problems, collection was
restricted only to the surface water of the cenof December 1984, February and April, 1985.
tral part of the Upper Lake. All the samples
were examined for their pH values on the spot
OBJECTIVES
using a field pH meter. The second and the third
MIC undergoes a series of exothermic polymeri- set of samples were collected from 25 to 26 Febsation reactions with trace amounts of water in ruary and 1 to 2 May 1985 respectively.
molar proportions to produce various hi-proAmmonia-nitrogen and urea-nitrogen conducts, for example, N -methyl carbamic acid, centrations in water were estimated by applying
N-N' -dimethyl uric acid, N-N'N trimethyI iso- the indophenol blue method and the diacetyl
cyanouric acid etc. But the end product of all monoxime method respectively using a field
these, in excess amount of water, is mono- spectrophotometer, at the Regional Research
methylamine. We, therefore, decided to measure Laboratory, Bhopal (RRL):
pH and the concentrations of monomethyl10 litres of water samples from the surface
amine, ammonia-nitrogen and urea-nitrogen in and 5 metre depth of the Lower Lake and from
water and the bio-accumulation of methylamine the surface of the Upper Lake were each shaken
in the aquatic organisms. Moreover, MIC is continuously for 6 hours with activated charcoal
known to inhibit the AChE activities in human and allowed to settle. The clear supernatant was
blood and the same can be expected to occur in decanted off and the rest was collected in PVC
INTRODUCTION

145

