bottles for analysIs at the NIO laboratory in
Dona Paula, Goa.
Several varieties of large common lake fishes
were collected from the Upper La-l{e. Their identification, length, sex and stage of maturity were
noted down as far as possible. They were dissected and representative portions of different body
tissues were collected and deep frozen for analysis at NIO, Goa. The Lower Lake was completely eutrophicated and was devoid of the same
varieties of fish as the Upper Lake. Whatever
small fishes could be collected from this lake
were frozen immediately for further analysis.
However, all the species of fish were not available on all the occasion.
Four blood samples, 2 ml each, were collected from MIC poisoned male patients, still lying
at the Hamidia Hospital only during our first
visit to Bhopal. These samples were centrifuged
and only the plasma were collected, frozen and
brought back to NIO.
At the NIO laboratories, the activated charcoal extracts of the water samples were brought
to acidic pH by adding 4N HCI to convert the
amine into its hydrochloride. This was done as
the hydrochloride is stable for analysis. The adsorbed amines were desorbed by shaking for 6
hours with 0.1 N HCl.
Different tissues of fishes were digested with
4N Hcl overnight to extract the amine. The digested extracts were then neutralized by 10N
NaOH in a reaction flask. The methylanline gas,
thus released, was taken into O.OOlN HCI using
nitrogen gas as the carrier. All the aquous solutions were treated sfrnilarly.
Attempts were made to analyse the hydrochloride solutions by both gas chromatography
and spectrophotometry. An alkaline colum
(USCON 5% + 2% KOH) with column temperature at 500 C, NIP detector temperature 2000 C
and N2 as carrier gas at the rate of 25 ml/min.,
was used in a Perkin Elmer Sigma Gas Chromatograph. But the peaks could hardly be detected. We, therefore, analysed the samples spectrophotometrically, concentrating the acid solu·
tions to 5 mI, applying the lactose method. The
red-coloured complex was measured at 540 nm.
The detection limit of the method, calculated by
replicates of several standard solutions, was 0.2
ug/ml of the test solution.
For the determination of AChE, enzymes
from the different tissues of fishes were extracted by grinding in presence of saline water and
phosphate buffer (pH 8) and centrifuged at 300
rpm under refrigerated conditions. These extracts and the plasma from human blood were
146

analysed spectrophotometncally for their AChE
activities, using acetylcholine bromide as the
substrate. The absorbance was measured at 620
nm. Detection limit, determined by repliate analyses of standards, was 0.01 ug/ml of the test
solution.
RESULTS
The results of the measurements of the biodegradational products and anti-cholinesterase
activities are presented in Tables 1 through V.
(i) pH, ammonia and urea in water

Table I indicates the values of pH, ammonianitrogen and urea-nitrogen concentrations of
water at different depths of the two lakes on
the threee sampling occasions. It was noticed
during some of the sampling that the effluents
from the city of Bhopal were being discharged
into the Upper t·a1{e. These effluents can be
expected to contain high amounts of nitrogen
and phosphorus, the effects of which could be
seen in the coastal areas of the Lake in the
growth of copious amounts of weeds and algae.
As stated earlier, the Lower Lake was fully
eutrophicated which was evident from the
large quantities of algae in water samples from
all the depths. The presence of these algae will
certainly add to the concentrations of nitrogen
and phosphorus compounds in water, perhaps
influenced by the instant toxic effect of MIC,
before its breakdown in water.
Values for pH, ammonia-nitrogen and ureanitrogen in the Lower Lake, in general, decreased from the first to the second occasion while
on the third occasion they increased. We presume that due to the instant toxic effect of MIC
the organisms died and sank to the bottom,
which was evident from the high concentrations
of ammonia-nitrogen and urea-nitrogen in the
bottom waters. A considerable contribution
must have also come from the degradation of
MIC which resulted in very low concentration of
methylamine in water (Table II). Values during
the third occasion would indicate eutrophicated
condition. High values at the surface waters of
the upper Lake was due to the effluent discharges, as methylamine was absent on all the three
occasions (Table II). For comparison, we also
estimated pH, ammonia and urea in tap water of
RRL during the first occasion. These values
appear to be fairly reasonable by lSI standard.
We made an attempt to compute the molepercentage of free ammonia, by applying litera-

