ture data. In the Lower Lake, these were 13, 11 methylamine in other species of fishes from the
and 9% of ammonia-nltrogen during the first Lower Lake on all the occasions would suggest
occasion, while during the subsequent occasions that Puntius tieto was very susceptible to MIC
it increased from 60 to 63% at the surface, 5 to poisoning and took longer time to convert
42% at 5 m, and 5 to 26% at 10 m. The toxic methylamine to other nitrogenous compounds.
limit of free ammonia for aquatic organisms,
Flshes, collected at UCE, did not have
particularly fishes, is 1.2 mg/I. All the values in methylamine in them. This lead us to conclude
the Lower Lake were higher than this limit. No that methylamine is not naturally present in
wonder, there is hardly any aquatic life there. In fishes. Whatever quantities were observed in fishthe Upper Lake the mole-percentage of free am- es from the lakes of Bhopal were certainly the
monia at the surface increased from 4 to 78% end-product of degradation of MIC. However, in
from the first to the third occasion. Care has to the absence of definite information, it is not
be taken to reduce free ammonia there to enable sure if these quantities were harmful to the fishthe aquatic life to sustain.
es themselves or to human beings after their consumption.
(ti) Methylamine in Water
(iv) Anti-cholinesterase activities in fishes
Table II presents the mono-methylamine concentrations in water of both the lakes. The con- Pesticide poisoning is known to inhibit the
centration in the Lower Lake water decreased AChE activities in human blood. We wanted to
from the first occasion (0.03 ug/l at the surface examine if the same happens in aquatic orgaand 0.05 ugfl at 5 m) to the second (0.005 ug/l nisms, particularly fishes, as well. We, therefore,
at the surface and 0.009 ug/l at 5 m). An increa- estimated the AChE activity in different tissues
se of concentration with depth could be noted. of fish samples from the lakes of Bhopal and
Mono-methylamine was, however, not detect- from the UCE. The data are presented in Table
able during the third occasion. It was also not IV.
detectable at the surface waters of the Upper
On the first occasion, AChE activities of
Lake on all the occasions. This indicates that the different tissues of fishes from the Lower Lake
Lower Lake, being nearer to the Factory than were markedly lower than those from the Upper
the Upper Lake, was comparatively more affect- Lake. In course of time the values in muscle, gill
ed by MIC.
and liver of Labio calbasu of the Upper Lake
increased. In fishes of the Lower Lake the values
(iii)Methylamine in Fishes
are definitely very low indicating, however, a
relative increase with time. The AChE activity in
Methylamine concentrations from fish samples Glassogobius giurus showed a significant decreaof both the lakes and from the uncontaminated se from the first to the second occasion. We also
environment (UCE) are presented in Table III. estimated AChE activities in different tissues of
Some bio-accumulation of methylamine can be a few species of fishes from the UCE and assumseen in the muscles of Labio gonius, Puntius ed them to be normal values in those fishes.
seTTana and Mestacemphalus sp.; in the swim Comparing the two sets of data, from Bhopal
bladder of Labio calbasu: and in gills of Labio and from the UCE, we could observe the followcalbasu and Puntius seTTana from the Upper ing:
Lake on the Ill'st occasion. The gall bladder of
(a) muscles, gills and liver of Labio ealbasu
Labio calbasu was observed to be highly distendfrom Bhopal, though affected, appear
ed. This may be due to some bacterial or viral
to be recovering with time, excepting
infection. Methylamine concentrations in those
the intestines;
species of fishes, which could be collected dur(b) muscles and gills of Labio gonius from
ing subsequent occasions, were non-detectable.
Bhopal were unaffected, while liver and
This would indicate that in course of time the
intestines appear to be affected somemetabolism of the fishes converted the methylwhat; and
amine to some other nitrogenous compounds.
(c) compared to Puntius stigma from the
Methylamine concentration in Puntius tieto
DCE, Puntius ticto from Bhopal appear
from the Lower Lake was fairly high (9.2 ug/kg
to be badly affected.
wet weight) during the first occasion. This reduced to 2.23 ug/kg during the second occasion
Similar trends can be expected for the other
to non~etectable during the third. Absence of species of fishes from Bhopal, at least at a first
147

