approXlmation We could not get those species
of fishes at the UeE at the time of sampling.
(v) Anti-cholinesterase activities in human blood

These observations were made in an attempt to
study the degree of lowering of AChE activities
in human blood caused by MIC poisoning, since
such results were expected. The normal process
of splitting of acetylcholine by acetylcholine
esterase within the nervous system of the body
gets stopped due to the blockage of the active
sites of the enzyme.
The AChE activities of blood plasma of the
MIC-poisoned patients are highly significant. All
the values in Table V are well below the expected range of 90 to 150 ~oles/mol of blood
plasma in normal human beings with good
health. Excepting for the 40-year old patient,
the other three values indicate an inverse ageAChE relationship. This can also be due to different degrees of exposure to MIC. This is clearly an indication of some sort of neurological disorder in the nervous system.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
Our observations in the aquatic environments of
Bhopal lead us to draw the following conclusions:
(a) The waters of the Upper Lake appear
to have recovered from the effects of
MIC, but contain an excessive amount
of free ammonia as a result of effluent

148

dIscharges. This should be regulated ImmedIately in the interests of drinkmg
water supply and fisheries.
(b) The Lower Lake is completely eutrophicated and, after the effects of MIC,
can be considered as dead for all practical purposes.
(c) Fishes in the Upper Lake seemed to
have recogered from methylamine but
the AChE activit.ies in some of their
tissues appear to be low. Perhaps it will
be useful to regulate the fishing activity, at least for a few months.
(d) All fishing activities in the Lower Lake,
if there are any, should be prohibited.
Depression of AChE activities in human beings leads to the disease Myesthaenia gravis,
marked symptom of which is constant general
marked symptom of which is constant general
weakness. Persons affected by exposure to MIC
are definitely suffe.l.1...lg from this disease, which
is said to be incurable. Low AChE activities in
some of the fishes from the lakes of Bhopal
would indicate that these too have been affected
due to the effects of MIC on their environment.
It is not known if Myesthaenia gravis can be
communicable from fishes to human beings consuming them. It is also not known if this disease
can be genetically transmitted from one generation to the next. Perhaps, this can form an
interesting programme of research to study the
long term effects of exposure of MIC.

