METHYL ISOCYANATE CHEMICAL
ACCIDENT IN MIS UNION CARBIDE INDIA
LTD, BHOPAL - A NEERI REPORT

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This document reports the efforts of NEERI
in 'OPERATION FAITH'.

The chemical accident involving methyl isocyanate in tile pesticide (carbaryl) manufacturing
plant of MIs. Union Carbide India Limited
(UeIL) at Bhopal has stunned the h~anity.
The accident reportedly occurred dunng the
early hours on 3rd December, 1984. The next
day (i.e. 4th Dec. 1984) the morning newspapers
flashed the news as the lead item and DGSIR,
around 5.15 pm instructed over telephone for a
NEERI team to be present at Bhopal with testing kits for studying the environmental impact
of this chemical accident.

The Document contains a brief account of
the manufacturing process for the pesticide, its
production in India, Physico-chemical properties
and toxicity data of MIC. Detailed information
on the climatological study and weather forecast
collected in coordination with ThiD is included.
The particulars of the analytical methods and
their standardisation are given. The results of the
analysis of air, water and soil samples. are pre·
sented. Information on Environmental Aspects
of Chemical Accidents, Emergency Response
Systems and Approach is quoted.

2.0 NEERl'S P ARTICIP ATION

3.0 MANUFACTURING PROCESSES

The first team of NEERI Scientists reached
Bhopal on the 5th morning with sampling equipments and started working immediately as per
the guidance and instructions from time to time
given by Dr. S. Varadarajan, DGSIR on what
came to be later known as 'OPERATION
FAITH'.

MethyI isocyanate (MIC) is an intermediate in
the production of carbaryl which is a carbamate
class of pesticide. MIC is synthesized from phosgene and monoethyl amine. In presence of an
excess amine this reaction leads to substituted
carbamides. In order to avoid this, the process is
carried out with equimolar ratios of phosgene to
amine or even with an excess of phosgene in a
solution of toluene, chlorobenzene or o-dichlorobenzene.

NEERI was assigned the work on monitoring
of environmental quality by sampling and analysing air) water and soil. Further NEERI also
coordinated in the collection, collation and
transmission of weather data with India Meteorological Department.
Laboratory facilities of Regional Research
Laboratory, Bhopal were availed by NEERI for
setting up of instruments for analysis of environmental samples. While this was going on at
Bhopal, simultaneously work on evolving sui~­
able analytical methods for MIC and related literature search commenced at NEERI, Nagpur on
an emergency basis.

The details of the manufacturing process are
given in Annexure 1.

3.1 Status of Carbaryl Production in India
From the "Report of the working group on
industry for the plan 1978-79 to
1983-84 (Govt. of India, Ministry of Petroleum,
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Dept. of Chemicals
and Fertilizers, 1979)", the following information shows the status of carbaryl production in
the country:
pe~ticides

lS7

