cember, 1984, i.e. after the episode. The second
was between 15th and 19th December, 1984
which includes a day prior to the start of the
neutralization of MIC through the completion
of the operation.
7.1 Sampling Locations
In the first instance air sampling was conducted
at TT Nagar water treatment plant, Upper Lake
pumping station and in Kanchi Chola. In the
second schedule three permanent sampling
statIons were established at:
1.

Railway Electrification, Railway Station,
Bhopal.

determination of methylamine by the Ninhydlin
method described under 'Analytical Studies'.
7.5 Results
The results of air analysis have clearly indicated
the presence of methylamine (as itself or as
degradation product of MIC) at concentrations
far below the TL V (threshold limit value) for
methylamine during December 16-17, 1984.
Monitoring studies were also continued up to
December 19, 1984. Results of this study have
indicated that the levels of methylamine were
decreasing steadily with time (Annexure 7).
8.0 MONITORING OF SOILS

2.

Matru Shishu Kalyan Kendra, Government
Dispensary, Risaldar Colony, Chola Naka, It is likely that methyl isocyanate (MIC) or its
Bhopal.
degradation products will ultimately find
their way into soil. In view of this, soil samples
3. Central Institute of Agricultural Engineer- were collected.
ing, Nabibagh, Bhopal.
8.1 Collection of Samples
Apart from these, air samples were also taken
from:
Surface soil samples were collected from the

1.
2.

Circuit house

3.

Infront of Union Carbide factory gate.

Birasia Road

7.2 Sample Collection Equipments
Air samples at railway station and government
dispensary were collected by using the trapping
provided in NEERI developed High Volume
Sampler. At Central Institute of Agricultural
Engineering it was taken through a suction
pump operated at electric main. At other
places air samples were collected by battery
operated air sampler.

7.3 Air Sample Collection
Air samples were collected by bubbling air in gas
impinger containing one per cent hydrochloric
acid in isopropanol as absorption solution. The
air was passed at a rate of 1 litre/minute for
one hour. Flow rate of air was constantly monitored and any change in flow rate was immediately adjusted.

7.4 Estimation of Methyl Isocyanate as Methyl-

vicinity of the Union Carbide factory, affected
areas and Water Works. campus. A detailed
description of soil samples has been given in
Table 8.1.1 and as shown on the map.
8.2 Preparation of Soil Samples for the Determination of Methyl Isocyanate/Methyla-

amine
A 10 g portion of soil samples was powdered
and suspended in 125 ml distilled water in an
Erlenmeyer flask. 2.5 ml of 4 N .NaOH was
added to it for the release of methylamine. The
soil suspension was shaken for an hour for complete extraction of methylamine. The suspension was then centrifuged and supernatant was
decanted. Extraction was repeated once again.
The two aqueous extracts were combined and
the total volume was made up to 250 rol with
distilled water.
This aqueous extract was treated similarly
with carbon tetrachloride and HeI as water
samples for the determination of methylamine.
A duplicate portion of the soil was dried at
l05 0 C for the determination of moisture. The
results are expressed on dry and moisture free
basis.

amine
8.3 Results
A 3 ml portion of absorbing solution from the
lmpinger was taken and processed for the

Ninhydrin method was employed for methyl-

