NEERI in coordination with IMD installed coordination through RRL, Bhopal and other
observatories at circuit house and Central Insti- State agencies to meet requirements of IMD,
tute for Agriculture Engineering (CIAE). These including transport, accommodation and flow
observatories were initially manned and ope- of data/infonnation to authorities.
rated by NEERI and later taken over by IMD.
Local observatories operated at following
Automatic weather recording instruments of locations:
NEERI and CIAE were used. NEERI extended
Sr. No.

Place

1.

Meteorological Centre,
Arera Colony

M1

IMD equipment installed

2.

Circuit House

M2

NEERI owned equipment
installed

3.

Central Institute for
Agriculture Engg (CIAE)

M3

Existing observatory at CIAE
was availed

4.

Bairagarh Airport

M4

Regular IMD observatory

Code No.

Wireless sets were provided at the four
observatories for transmitting hourly and 24
hourly data on 'current weather' to control
room at the Secretariat building. This arrangement was one of the 'zero risk' precautionary
measures, prior to commencement of operation of neutralization of MIC.
9.1 Weather Forecast
Daily forecasts valid for next 24 hours were
issued twice, at 1100 hr and 2100 hr. These
were in (i) technical and (ii) plain version.
Technical report dealt with individual weather
parameters: synoptic features, surface winds,
temperature and inversions. Plain language
dealt with the direction and speed of winds in
relation to factory (UCIL) location. This was for
identification of vulnerable areas in the event of
an unlikely untoward incident. Forecast information was used to brief officials whenever
necessary. Specimen copy of weather report
and forecast data are appended (Annexure 8).
9.2 Weather at Bhopal from
19-12-84

Remarks

1984. On 12th, there was a low pressure trough
in the lower troposphere over Bhopal, which
caused a change in the normal wind pattern,
i.e. rise in wind speed up to 15 to 30 kmph
and wind direction westerly to south-westerly
on 12th and 13th of Dec. 1984 (Annexure 8).
Otherwise wind speed varied from 10 to 15
kmph and wind direction north-west to easterly
through northerly.
Maximum temperature varied from 24 0 C
to 30.5 0 C
Minimum temperature varied from BAoC
to 13.7 o C.
Each day, ground based inversion started in the
late evenings, Le. around 2200 hr and peak of
inversion reached maximum height of about
400 m in the early morning and varied by
1000 hr. During day time, elevated inversions
were observed at 2 km height and above.
10.0 ENVIRONMENTAL ASPEcrS OF
CHEMICAL ACCIDENTS

10-12-84 to

10.1
Chemical manufacture, wherever it is
carried out, is a multi-product and multi-process
Bhopal is located in a geographically rough industry using a wide range of basic raw materrain surrounded by hillocks. Anticyclones terials and intermediates, which makes several
persisted for the most part of time over Bhopal heterogeneous products of diverse nature.
during the period of survey which caused stable Thousands of tonnes of hazardous chemical
atmosphere over the city. There was no devia- compounds. are daily produced, transported,
tion from the normal wind pattern during the stored and used all over the world. Currently,
fortnight except on 12th and 13th December, about 45,000 substances are found in world
16S

