ANNEXURE 1

Manufacturing Processes
Methyl isocyanate is produced by reacting phosgene with methylamine. The reaction takes place
in two stages. The first stage consists of the reaction of phosgene with monomethylamine leading to the formation of carbamoyl chloride
(2CH 3 NH 2 + COC1 2
CH 3 NHCOCl +
CH 3 NH2 .HCI). The amine is added to the phosgene dissolved in one of the solvents stated earlier (p.2) so that phosgene is in excess.
In the second stage the suspension obtained

is heated up to 150-2000 C. At elevated temperature amine hydrochloride dissociates, the phosgene reacts with the liberated amine and the carbamoyl chloride splits off HCI, giving an isocyanate. The overall reactions is as follows:
CH3NH2 + COC1 2 ----:;. CH3N = C = 0 + 2HCl

There are two methods for the continuous
liquid phase synthesis of MIC. In one method,
the process is carried out in two steps in two
separate reactors - one operates at a lo,w temperature and the other at a higher temperature. In
the other method, the reaction takes place in
one step in a column type reactor at a high
temperature (about 200o c). The yield of MIC
exceeds 90%.
Phosgene required for MIC synthesis is prepared from carbon monoxide, obtained by passing air over red hot coke, in a controlled manner

168

and then reacting with chlorine gas.

e+0

--..:,. CO

Carbaryl can be synthesised by two principal methods.
(i)

Interaction of isocyanate with alpha naphthol

Hi) Amidation of the esters of chlorocarbonic
acid.

o

RN = C = 0 + ArOH~RNH - C~
'OAr

o

Ar' 0 COel + RNH2 --+RNHC'
+ HCI
'OAr'
Both reactions are exothermic and practically irreversible. While the first method is used at
UCIL, Bhopal, at present, the second method
was followed up to 1978 at their plant at institute, West Virginia. The esterification of isocyanate is carried out at 60-80 0 C and the isocyanate is gradually added upon stirring to an excess of alpha naphthol. Solvents (e.g. carbon
tetrachloride) may be used for the reaction with
naphthol. Both methods give a high yield of product (more than 95%) and have similar cost
indices.

