ANNEXURE 4

Torle Effects of Isocyanates in Work Environment
A comprehensive information regarding physiologic effects, toxicity, industrial hygiene
and medical control of those isocyanates
generally associated with polyurethanes is
given by Woolrich (1982). The characteristics and most significant physiological effect
of exposure to the isocyanates is a direct irritant or sensitization response not unlike asthma.
It is most unlikely that long-term exposure to
TDI, MDI and PMPPI vapours would produce
oncogenic effects.
Thirty seven wor kers with isocyanate
asthma were studied by Innocenti et al (1981)
longitudinally to determine the chronic pulmonary effects due to isocyanates after cease
of expoSU!"e. After a mean time_of 40 months
the asthmatic symptoms had disappeared in
32 (86%) workers, while chronic bronchitis
developed in 6 (24 %). The progressive impairment of ventilatory function. was evaluated
by means of a longitUdinal study of the decrease in FVC and FEV 1.0 after cease of exposure: a mean annual decrease of 86.3 ml
and 67.7 ml, respectively, was observed. These
data suggest that TDI induces chronic and
irreversible damages even if the exposure is
discontinued, and support the view that the
FVC is more impaired than the FEVl.O.

with bronchial asthma due to isocyanates and
in 19 patients with chronic obstructive lung
disease (COLD) exposed to isocyanates was
evaluated by Pagiarro et al (1979). Sixteen
asthmatic patients showed different types of
response to an isocynate challenge; however,
delayed response, isolated or preceded by
transient immediate reaction, appeared more
characteristic of asthmatic patients with atopy.
Three of the patients with COLD showed an
immediate response and two a dual type response to the challenge, usually of mild degree.
These data suggest that there is an immunological basis to asthma induced by isocyanates
and raise the question of the relationship between the various clinical patterns of hypersensitivity.
Isocyanates are likely to be carcinogenic
to man. A case of lung cancer which dev€1loped
in the course of an occupational chronic bronchopulmonary disease due to isocyanates has
been reported by Mortillare and Schiavon
(1982).

Certain types of firefighting foams are
reported by Hardy and Purnell (1978) to be
useful for the suppression of the vapour from
isocyanate liquid surfaces. In the case of a
large isocyanate release within a bund enclosure,
the technique may allow the insertion of a pipe
through the overlying foam and gel 'skin' into
the organic layer in order to pump the latter
The prevalence of atopy in 20 patients into suitable containers for subsequent disposal.

( I
1""''''''

