ANNEXURE 9

ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF CHEMICAL
ACCIDENTS

A. Emergency Response System
Any emergency response system is designed
to reduce the impact of an accident by rapid
contairunent. In the case of toxic chemical
accidents, it is essential to know the nature of
the chemicals, how to deal with them, the toxic,
physical chemical properties and the level of
risk involved in contact, both for the -emergency
crews and the adjacent population. Thus, the
accident involving the release of potentially
toxic or hazardous chemicals is different from
the nonnal emergency (traffic accident, fire,
train derailment, etc).
By definition, an accident is an unplanned
event and thus no two accidents are exactly
the same. Further accidents are going to happen
regardless of our efforts to prevent them. Hence
it is of paramount importance that Governments
prepare adequate contingency planning as it
will help in prompt mobilization of expert
services, manpower and equipment to minimize
the effects of accidents. The strategies suggested
for reducing the threats from chemical accidents
include: (i) to minimise risk of accident occurrence (prevention), (ti) to rapidly contain
(emergency response), and (iii) to effectively
rehabilitate damaged areas (restoration).
The document suggested guidelines to
assist countries to develop compatible strategies for preparing contingency planning
systems which are both adequate and rapidly
and effectively implementable to respond to
specific emergencies.

accidents
micals

during transportation of che-

misuse of chemicals, resulting in contamination of foodstuffs, the environment,
overdosing of agrochemicals, etc.
improper waste management, such as uncontrolled dumping of toxic chemicals,
failure in waste management systems or
accidents in wastewater treatment plants.
Depending on the quality and quantity llf
chemicals involved in an accident and the
local condition the emergency may be classified from various perspectives.
(a) Environmental health aspects:

low contamination of all or part of the
environment with only minor annoying
effects, but not requiring protective and!
or extensive remedial measures
serious contamination of all or part of the
environment creating difficulties for man's
activities and requiring some protective
and/or remedial measures
dangerous contamination of all or part
of the environment, limiting some of man's
activities in the area
ex treme ly dangerous contamination of all
or part of the environment preventing the
continuation of many activities.

B. Types of Emergencies
The more important chemical emergencies
that may arise are as follows:
disaster /explosion in a plant handling
or producing potentially toxic substances

(b) Duration of adverse effects:
short-tenn effects (several hours to a few
days)
long-term effects (several weeks or months)

accidents in storage facilities handling
large quantities of various chemicals

186

almost pennanent effects (to last for years)

