(c) Extent of remedial action required:
minor short-term remedies pro"ided at the
operator level - this is normally in built in
all industries
considerable remedial activities often of
long-term character and exceeding the
capabilities of the local level
considerable long-term rehabilitation
the environment in the affected area.

c.

of

Level of Accident

Accident level is classified depending on the
scope or level of accident. Four levels of acciare considered and these are described below:
Level I (Operator level): An accident where
the adverse effects are limited to confines of
one facility (e.g. a plant, railway station, storage
depot, farm, gas or oil pipeline booster stations
and/or terminals) and can be contained and
controlled by the operator on the site. Although
in some instances it may require the resources
of the whole facility to control, the effects of
which are not expected to spill over into the
community.
Level II (- Local/community level): This involves an accident where the effects are spread
to the community but can be contained by the
resources of the community, plus resources
of the industry involved. The majority of
transportation accidents, viz. , these occuring
'on route' will fall in this category.
Level III (Regional/national level): This may
be large and/or more serious accident or it
may be simply that it occurred at the border
between two jurisdictions (regional or communities) within one nation or country. This may
be described as an inter-jurisdictional emergency
and may be handled with the resources available
at the regional or national level, employing
also the resources of the communities and
industries involved (e.g. Bhopal :tvlIC gas
tragedy).
Level IV (International level): This is more
than a complex accident exceeding the boundaries or resources of one nation. This may be
a very large-scale national disaster or it may
be unique event requiring for its handling
special skills or facilities not available in that
country and/or it may simply be a small accident -vhich occurs close to the border of a

neIghbouring country. The last type of emergency may be contained using national resources, but the management of the control
may be undertaken by fu~ international team
(2 or more affected nations) established for
the purpose.
D. Criteria for Contingency Planning
There is continuous need for assessment of
the risks imposed on the community by potentially hazardous installations, development
and/or operations involving toxic chemicals.
A hazard is a property of a system which could
cause injury or damage, whereas a risk is the
probability of an accident occurring multiplied by the damaging effects of the accident.
No precise definitions/distinctions are possi~
ble for a toxic or hazardous chemical but can
be generally defined as one which can directly
cause death or serious irreversible or incapaciating disease, behavioural abnormalities, carcinogenic, teratogenic, mutagenic or other
long-tenn effects in man. Naturally these effects
are directly related to the concentration and
fonn of such chemicals in environment as well
as mode of entry or contact with the population.
For development of contingency plan the
following criteria are important.

type of operation (probability of accident)
probable character of potential accident
( e.g. explosion, fast release of chemicals
into environment, slow release and/or
dispersion of the chemicals)
characteristics of chemical involved in
possible accident (toxicity, volatility, persistance)
local conditions (layout and processes of
plant, neighbouring industries, settlements,
resources available for emergency response)
possible consequences of potential accident
(area potentially affected, risk to people,
spread of damage).
The complexity of individual systems involved, as well as the variety of influences
and condition, require the preparation of
contingency plans for each particular situation.
187

