INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
The Bhopal Disaster
Bhopal, (Lat. 23.16° N; 77.240 E) the capital of Madhya Pradesh. having, a popu lation of
approximately nine lakhs and located 355 miles south of Delhi, had world's worst chemical disaster
that took place around midnight of 2nd December, 1984. Deadly methyl isocyanate had escaped from
a storage facility at a local Union Carbide plant situated at the north-east end about 2 km from the
Bhopal Railway Station. The escaping gas quickly spread in a fog like cloud over a large and
highly populated area of about 7-8 sq km mostly to the south and ea~t of the plant (please see the
map on the adjacent page).
The leakage created panic among the residents of Bhopal. Almost one third to half of the
population left the city to save their fives. Many died, while many others managed to survive with
severe lung problems, eye irritations, confusion, mental problems etc.
The early acute effects, aside from the pathetic death toll were frightening, particularly
in their indication of possible long-term prognoses. As the cloud of gas swept over parts of the
city, striken residents experienced a burning sensation in the eyes, nose and throat. Many burst
out of their homes coughing, and gasping for breath. Some began vomiting uncontrollably, others
just collapsed. Ulcers formed on the corneas of some victims, blindmg them.
The immediate reaction of the scientific and medical community of the country was to offer,
in the best possible way, whatever help could be given to save the lives of the unfortunate
victims and to prevent untoward health effects in future. ITRC team and medical doctors
from all over the country rushed to Bhopal carrying with them the necessary medicines and other
requisites and alongwith their colleagues in Bhopal did a yeomen job in providing medical
assistance to the suffering humanity of Bhopal. The medical fraternity of India specially that of
Bhopal has a sense of pride. The pride comes from the way in which the immediate medical
response to the disaster was handled. By all accounts, Bhopal's considerable medical establishment
reacted spontaneously and adeptly to the unprecedented emergency. But, once the acute problem
was over it was time to concentrate on what long-term effects this gas will have on the health of
the exposed population. The exposure posed some important questions:

1.

What are the long-term effects in the surviving population of Bhopal?

2.

Since the gas caused pulmonary edema, is it likely that the victims may develop
pulmonary fibrosis in due course of time?

205

