3.

What is the effect of the exposure on the pulmonary function of the victims and
whether the pulmonary function will remain stationary, improve or deteriorate with
passage of time ?

4.

Whether immunological functions have been impaired 7

5.

Whether the victims have become prone to develop respir&tory infections-viral,
bacterial and others 7

6.

It is likely that exposure to methyl isocyanate may have resulted

In

hypoxia which in

turn might have affected the nervous tissue and caused neuronal damage.

It would

beneficial to conduct a battery of behavioural be psychological tests which could
detect the earliest changes of the central nervous system.

7. Since methyl isocyanate affects the eyes, many of the exposed population must have
suffered with varying degrees of ocular damage ranging from only a slight irritation
of the eyes to severe injury.
8.

The exposed

popu lation has received varying amounts at methyl isocyanate which

entered the body system through inhalation, got reacted with functional biomolecules,
metabolised and ultimately excreted causing systemic toxicity.
The follow-up study was undertaken by ITRC to find some answers to the above questions.
Prof. P. K. Ray, Director, ITRC organised a team of scientists and technicians who reached
Bhopal on 11th February, 1985 to conduct a follow-up study of methyl isocyanate exposed population Dr R. K. Bisaria, the Mayor of Bhopal was contacted to get a suitable venue to establish the
follow-up study Centre so that the affected people could be s1udjed under one roof. Dr Bisaria
extended full cooperation in providing two rooms in the Nagar Nigam Building. Dr M. I. Khan,
Principal, Hahnemann Homceopathic Medical College and Hospital at Noor Mahal Road, Bhopal,
provided eight rooms in his hospital.
ITRC established folJow-up-study Centre at this place
on 14th February, 1985. The clinic was inaugurated by Dr R. K. Bisaria, the Mayor of Bhopal.
During the first phase we studied 687 gas affected people both male and female including
children, of various age groups and from different affected areas like Chola Road, Kaji Camp,
Islampure, Bazaria railway station, Chandbarh etc. The daily inflow of patients ranged from 70 to
80 cases. Our whole team worked hard to cover up this large rush. The following parameters
were studied in each case:
1.

History taking

2.

Clinical examination

3.

Chest X-ray

206

