LUNG FUNCTION STUDIES

Isocyanates are highly reactive substances and present a toxic hazard since exposure to
isocyanate vapours have been reported to cause acute irritation of respiratory tract and bronchospastic reactions.

The inhaled Isocyanates may react with components in the lung, leading to chan-

ges or to the inhibition of biological functions. The isocyanates have also been shown to cause
pulmonary impairment and typical attacks of bronchial asthma and hypersensitivity and pneumonitis
in the exposed workers. In view of this it was aimed to evaluate the pulmonary function status of the
methyl isocyanate gas affected population of Bhopal and to determine the prevalence of respiratory
impairment observed in the exposed population.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
lung spirometry was conducted in 783 cases out of 1135 gas victims examined in the
present respiratory screenin g programme during February/March 1985 at Bhopal. Out of 783 cases,
371 males and 412 females took part in the pulmonary function testing. Children below the age of
10 years were not included in this study since they were unable to perform lung function tests properly. Among the 371 male population studied, there were 179 (48.2%) non-smokers and 192
(51.7%) revealed smoking habit while in the female population the re was none with the smoking
history.
The study population was broadly classified into two sub-groups depending upon the presence or absence of respiratory symptoms viz., dry or wet cough, exertional dyspnoea of varying
grades, chest pain, chest irritation, chest tightness etc., induced by methyl isocyanate gas exposure.

1

Asymptomatic PopulatioD

This comprised of the sample of the study population which was unaffected by the methyl
isocyanate gas exposure as evidenced by the absence of any pulmonary symptom as revealed during
interrogation while completing the MRQ, modified respiratory questionnaire. Hence this sample was
treated as NAD group with respect to pulmonary function study.
2

Symptomatic PopulatioD

This set of population complained of vadous upper and lowar respiratory tract symptoms
ranging from cough to throat irritation caused by the inhalation of methyl isocyanate gas.

218

