METHODOLOGY
The following spirometric lung functions were recorded using calibrated Vitalograph
(Model-S, U. K.) and Morgan's Dry Spirometer (Model M-8, U. K.) in standing position with nose
clip on. The dry spirometers were frequently' checked for calibration of volume and speed statically
and dynamically with a 50 ml syringe.
( i ) Vital Capacity (VC)
( ii) Forced Vital Capacity (FVC)
(iii) Forced Expiratory Volumes (FEVo' 75 ' FEVl )
( iv ) Tiffeneau Index, FEV1/FVC Ratio
( v) Maximal Voluntary Ventilation (MVV)
( vi) Forced Expiratory Flow Rate FEFR (200-1200ml)
(vii) Mid Expiratory Time (MET)
(viii) Mid Expiratory Flow Rate (MEFR 2S-7S%)
( ix) Air Velocity Index (AVI)
( x) Peak Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR)
( xi) PEFR/MMEF Ratio
The population studied was instructed and demonstrated the correct technique to perform
these spirographic tests. Patients performed at least three satisfactory VC and FVC manoeuvres.
We determined the test satisfactory if the case understood the instructions and performed the test
with a smooth continuous exhalation; with apparent maximal effort. The unsatisfactory spirograms
were discarded on the following grounds :
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

No maximal effort observed while performing the spirometry
Early termination of expiration
leakage through mouth
Mouth piece obstruction by the tongue or teeth

Thus only those spirograms were included in the study which showed less than 5% variation in FVC and FEV) among the three acceptable curves as recommended by Ferris (1978).
Peak Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR) was recorded with the help of Peak Flow Meter
designed by B.M. Wright (Standard Mod~I, U. K,) and the highest value attained was included in the
study. The values of spirometric lung functions were expressed at Body Temperature and Ambient
Pressure Saturated with Water Vapour (BTPS). Maximal Voluntary Ventilation was calculated from
FEV 0'75 by multiplying it by 40. AVI was calculated from the predicted VC and MVV as follows:

% of

AVI

Normal MBC

= -------% of Normal VC

Normal value was considered to be 1.0. Higher values indicated restrictiv~ pattern and
lower values showed obstructive type of respiratory impairment. The FEVt/FVC percentage between
70-80% was considered within the normal range and values less than 70CYo indicated central airway
obstruction.
The predicted normal values for the various lung function tests were derived from the
regression equations laid by Rastogi et al (1983) for the adult male population. For the female
population, the normal predicted values were calculated using Jain's (1966, 1967 & 1969) and

219

