±0.08 litres respectively between their observed and predicted values (p <0.001). Like other
pulmonary functions IMBC also exhibited a significant mean decrease of -33.6 ±2.2 fitres/min
between the observed and the predicted mean values (p<O.001). While PEFR although reduced did
not indicate significant reduction with respect to the mean predicted value.
The female population affected by mixed ventilatory defect showed similar pattern of various
lung functions as described earlier in the male population. Here also the observed VC and FVC were
significantly decreased in contrast to their respective mean reference values. The VC and FVC revealed significant reductions of -0.91 ±0.03 litres and -0.69 ± 0.03 fitres respectively between their
observed and predicted mean values (p<0.001). Similarly, mean observed !MBC was also tremendously decreased in contrast to the mean reference value thereby showing a mean difference of -27.6
±1.16 litres/min (p<0.001). Air Velocity Index was found to be raised (1.02 ±O.02%) in these
cases.

Discussion
The present study revealed that Bhopal population, both male and female, exposed to MIC
gas due to accidental leakage from the Union Carbide factory on 2nd/3rd December, ·1984 still
suffered from various types of ventilatory impairment even after 90 days when this respiratory morbidity .and pulmonary function evaluation study was carried out in the months of February and
March/April, 1985. The overall prevalence of respiratory impairm3nt was found to be 44.1 % in the
female population in contrast to the 33.9% observed in the male population examined. Thus the
female populaiion revealed significantly higher prevalence of pulmonary abnormalities induced by
the MIC gas inhalation.
The three categories of pulmonary impairment recorded in the exposed population were
obstructive, restrictive and the combined or mixed restrictive-cum-obstructive ventilatory disorder ..
It is seen from the results that in the majority of the cases, males or females suffered from mixed
pulmonary disturbance (15.3% and 28.4%) respectively followed by restrictive pattern of the lung
disease (14.8% in the male and 12.1 % in the female population), while bronchial obstruction was
recorded only in 3.6% female and in 3.7,% male population.
The results of the pulmonary function studies:confirmed that it is the mild form of pulmonary
impairment which was mostly observed in the male and female population studied. This was
evidenced by the FEV/FVC ratio which showed a mean value of 63.4% in the male population while
female population exhibited a mean value of 64.3% thereby suggesting presence of mild bronchial
obstruction. Thus Bhopal population exhibited mild mixed, restrictive and bronchial obstruction as
a result of exposure to M IC gas. Thus the study showed that there were only 2 cases of severe
bronchial obstruction in the 783 cases studied, 1 in the female and 1 in the male population.
Similary there were only 5 severe cases detected out of 50 cases of lung restriction in the
female population studied whereas in male population of 55 cases of restrictive ventilatory defect
none developed severe form of lung restriction. All the 55 cases revealed mild lung restriction.
Out of the 117 mixed pulmonary defect cases in the female population only 10 revealed severe
mixed pulmonary impairment whereas in the male population out of 57 cases of mi xed lung impairment only 8 cases suffered form severe mixed ventilatory disturbance.
The prevalence of various respiratory impairment was also analysed age-wise in the male
and female population. None of the types of pulmonary impairment revealed any definite trend with

244

