the various age groups in which male or female population was classified. This shows that the
respiratory system of population of different age groups was equally affected by the inhalation of
MIC vapours.
The prevalence of respiratory impairment was also analysed statistically with respect to
various distance groups in which the study population lived at the time of M IC release as well as at
the time of the study. Our study failed to derive any corre lation between the prevalence of various
types of pulmonary impairment observed in the male or female population and the various distance
groups showing thereby that the study population living near the UCIL plant (0-1 Km) or staying
far (4-5 Km) from it developed respiratory impairment of similar magnitude.
Pulmonary function study conducted in the asymptomatic and the symptomatic male or
female population revealed that a battery of tests were significantly affected in th~ population which
suffered from various respiratory symptoms. The spirometric parameters viz., VC, FVC, FEVo.7f),
FEV,"o' FEV1/FVC ratio and IMBC revealed mean decreased values in contrast to their respective,
reference values calculated from the predicted equations prepared for healthy Indian population
thereby indicating the presence of bronchial obstruction and lung restriction in the symptomatic male
or female population. On the contrary, the population which did not complain of respiratory problems at the time of this study revealed normal spirometry.
It can thus be concluded on the basis of this study that the M IC gas which was accidentally
released from the UCI L plant revealed its toxic effect on the respiratory tract of exposed population
as indicated by high prevalence of respiratory impairment and decreased pulmonary function values
in the symptomatic male and female population. The mechanisms responsible for causing lung impairment by the MIC gas are not yet very clear. Some investigators believe that MIC has an acute irritating
effect on the respiratory tract resulting in the bronchospastic reactions (Munn, 1965., Peters, 1970.,
Saur et ai, 1979). While others proposed that isocyanate induced respiratory disease may be
immunologically mqdiated (Karol et ai, 1978). While a third hypothe'sis has been suggested that
the isocyanates are pharmacologically active (Butcher et ai, 1979). They proposed that the chemically active hydrogen atoms are attached to oxyg~n, nitrogen' or sulphur, therefore, it is not
unexpected that inhaled isocyanates may react with components in the lung, leading to changes
or to the inhibition of biological function. Oewair et al (1983) suggested a biochemical mechanism
which acted through the inhibition of cholinesterase inhibitor enzymes by isocyanates since the
broncho-constrictor responses to stimulation of vagus nerves are known to be potentiated by
cholinesterase inhibitors leading to the development of respiratory disorders. Trevisan and Moro
(1981) also reported on the role of AChE inhibition in TOI induced broncho-constriction. They
observed a small but significant decreases in the AChE activities of the erythrocytes of workers
experimentally challenged by the isocyanate vapours. They suggested that inhalation of isocyanates may lead to a gradua I accumulation of inhibited enzyme (s) and/or other components'~ In the
respiratory systems to ,an extent which eventually exceeds the capacity of reactivation mechanism.
This capacity may differ from one person to another, leading to the observed individual differences
in the susceptibility to isocyanate sensitization. Rye (1973) has proposed two types of pulmonary
responses to isocyanate exposure. One is direct irritant response which is governed by the total
dose of exposure in direct relationship and the second is the allergic response which is controlled
by host reaction. Direct irritant or toxic response is due to triggering of normal protective mechanism of the upper respiratory tract and mimics that of other respiratory irritants. The second type
of response is host generated or controlled and is truly allergic. It is not to be expected on initial
exposure but uSl,Jally develops after a reasonable time.

245

