The other pulmonary and cardiac abnormalities observed in the M IC exposed population
are similar to such abnormalities in any group of Indian population. Seven cases showed presence
of pneumonitis in their X-rays: Out of these cases, involvement of the right lower zone was seen in
5 subjects, left lower zone in 1 subject and both lower zones in 1 subject, while left sided pleural
effusion was observed in 1 subject only. TensieJn bullae on right lower zone, lung collapse on
right lower lobe and middle lobe was observed.
73 subjects (8.1 ~/o) showed radiological
abnormalities which are suspected to be related to MIC exposure. Out of these, in 48 subjects,
the radiological changes observed appear to be caused by MIC exposure. The radiological findings
of these cases are given in Table 1. The radiological changes observed in these X-rays are definitely
abnormal findings but they do not conform to any definite diagnosis. These findings are haziness
seen is different zones of the lungs, hilar prominence, fine mottling, reticulation etc. The changes
are more marked in right lung as compared to left lung. Haziness is more commonly seen in lower
zone (40 X-rays out of 48 showed haziness of right lower zone, whereas, 11 out of 48 X-rays showed
haziness of the left lower zone). One case showed haziness of the upper zone on right side,
whereas on left side no case showed haziness of the upper zone. Comparing the middle zone on right
and left side it was 0bserved that 3 cases showed haziness of the middle zone on right side, whereas,
6 cases showed haziness of the middle zone on left side. Preponderance of abnormalities i.e. haziness,
hilar prominence etc. on the right side is probably because of the anatomical configuration of the
right and left bronchus. The right bronchus baing wider probably permitted more of MIC gas to
enter the right lung and hence more abnormalities were observed on the right side.
Although haziness was observed in almost all the X-rays in this group it was surpriSing to
note that hardly a few subjects presented with fever also.
Hilar shadows were prominent in 47 out of 48 cases in this group. Prominence of the right
hilar was more common (47 out of 48) whereas left hilar was prominent in 41 out of 47 cases.
Constophrenic angle, heart size and trachea did not reveal any significant abnormality.
There was no correlation between radiological picture and clinical presentation.
with clear cut pneumonitis had no evidence of toxaemia.

The cases

Out of these 48 cases, 37 subjects were within 2 km distance from the Union Carbide
factory at the time of exposure and 10 subjects were at a distance of 2-4 km while only one person
was at a distance of more than 4 km. As 37 out of 48 subjects were within 2 km from the
factory they are likely to have been exposed to a significant amount of gas, and the resultant
radiological change in their X-rays is due to'high exposure.
Group B :

Cases showing radiological changes suggestive of old pathology which was
aggravated by M Ie exposure:
Tuberculosis
7
Chronic bronchitis
6

4

Pneumonitis
Total

17

The radiological findings of 17 subjects reveal the old pathology as tuberculosis, chronic
bronchitis and pneumonitis. These old pathologies seem to be aggravated by M IC exposure as the
symptoms in these subjects appear only after the gas exposure. Pneumonitis is more commonly
seen in the right lower zone similar to the observation in group A subjects.

248

