BIOCHEMICAL STUDIES

A highly reactive substance like MIC could interact with the functional groups of a wide
variety of biomolecules like nucleic acids, carbohydrates, proteins, etc. affecting their natural functions. Such reactions in the upper respiratory passages could be a factor in pulmonary toxicity
directly and in other tissues indirectly. Interaction of MIC with body water and possibly small
biomolecules, especially in the presence of ions, could also lead to toxic intermediates, or to
deprivation of vital molecules. These effects could be reflected in blood and urine, as is the case
with most stress factors. Therefore, explanatory biochemical studies were conducted on MIC
exposed cohorts and controls.

RESULTS
Initial Phase
The estimation of ammonia and urea in serum, urine ano sputum was performed in 35
male and 26 female patients who were admitted to hospital immediately after MIC exposure. The
results of the analysis (Table1) revealed that more than 50% of the patients had raised values of
ammonia and urea both in sputum and serum. A similar pattern was observed in the urine but
the levels of ammonia and urea were not much ·higher than the reported higher limit. In general. it
was found that the male population was more affected than females.

Follow-up
In a separate study, the following investigations were conducted in patients exposed to
MIC four months after its exposure.
Biochemical Parameters in whole Blood and Serum
Glutathione level was significantly reduced in 30% of the population (Table 2). Serum
GOT (EC 2;6.1.1), GPT (EC 2.6.1.2), and Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (EC ~.3.2.2) and total
bilirubin were found to be almost normal in these populations (Tables 3&4). However, the ceruloplasmin content was significantly raised in more than 45% of the population examined (Table 4).
In some cases (35%), it was even more than one-and-a half to two folds higher than the highest
normal value reported· in literature (50 mg%), (Oser, 1965). In 10CYo population, th~ value was
raised only by 5 to 140/0' The elevated ceruloplasmin levels were found in both the sexes with a more
prominent change in female population. Changes in ceruloplasmin, (an acute phase/reactant
protein) may be r~4ated to inflammatory disorders and to Fe, Cu transport and related functional
alterations (Frieden, 1981). It is also responsible for the incorporation of iron into transferrin which
is ultimately taken up by bone marrow for the synthesis of haemoglobin. Significant increase in
the ceruloplasmin content observed among 40CYo of the MIC. exposed population surveyed, may be
an indication of
Nriagu, 1980).

inflammation and possible changes

261

in haemopoietic system (Goodie,

1950;

