CHROMOSOMAL STUDIES
The present cytogenetic study was conducted by the Department of Anatomy, GSVM Medical College, Kanpur in co/laboraHon with Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow in MIC
victims at Bhopal.
A thorough clinical examination revealed congestion and degenerative
changes in conjunctivae, decreased lung function, tenderness of liver and colon, congestion in
throat, dermatitis, impairment of sexual desire and impotency, insomnia, sluggish deep jerks and
raised reaction time.
Andersen et al (1980) in a standard Ames' test found that toluene di-isocyanate (TOI)
and 4, 4-methylenediphenylisocyanate (MOl), were mutagenic in the presence of a conventionally
prepared microsomal fraction (59). This study itself calls for a thorough in vivvo studies so that any
genetic and carcinogenic potential can be quantitatively assessed. Moreover, the massive exposure
of MIC gas to the residents of Bhopal, raised the vital question of any long term genotoxicity.
Therefore, chromosomal aberrations in the peripheral blood 'Iymphocyte culture of the subjects
exposed to MIC gas were studied to assess its mutagenic and carcinogenic potential.

Materials and Methods
The study was done in 31 subjects of either sex and of random age group who attended
our temporary outpatient clinic at Bhopal. 5 ml of peripheral venous blood was drawn in a heparinized disposc:ble syringe. The buffy coat lymphocytes were obtained by incubating the blood at 37°C
in the syringe as such keeping the syringe at a inclination of 70° for 45 minutes. These lymphocytes
were cultured in. media TC199, at 37°C for 68 hours, using phytohaemagglutinin-P (PHA-P, Difeo)
and homologous patients serum. Three hours before harvesting, 8 drops of colchicine (0.01 %) was
added. The cultured lymphocytes· were treated with 0.56<yo hypotonic saline for 20 minutes and
fixed in 3: 1 methanol-glacial acetic acid for 15 minutes at 37°C. The air dried slides were prepared
and stained with 4~~ buffered giemsa for 30 minutes and Trypsin-G banding was done. One hundred well spread metaphases from each case were studied for chromosomal aberration~. The results
were compared with 31 control cultures set in the normal residents of Bhopal who were not exposed to the MIC gas.

RESULTS
Metaphases were observed for presence of breaks and gaps. Number of breaks and gaps
in 100 metaphases of each case were noted (Table 1).

'f test was applied to find out the significance of difference in means of chromosomal
aberration data. The mean data in the exposed group was compared with the control group after
ascertaining the assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance.
When breaks in test group is compared with the control group, the results indicate that the
difference was observed at 0.001 % of level of significance (Table 2). The same level of significance
was found with the gaps, i.e. p<O.001 (Table 3).

271

