BEHA VIOURAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDIES
The signs and symptoms observed in many of the M IC exposed population suggested likely
effects on central and peripheral nervous systems. Therefore behavioural studies on the exposed
population to assess the degree of involvement of the nervous system due to M IC exposure were
undertaken.

Objectives
1.

To study the visual perception/memory, auditory memory, perceptual motor speed,
attention/response speed and manual dexterity of MIC exposed population of Bhopal.

2.

To evaluate the exposed population on a standardized subjective questionnaire.

Methodology
In this study only those psychological tests which are recommended by W. H. O. (1984)
have been taken. Most of these tests are developed by the Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki,
Finland (1979) and are accepted world over as standard behavioural test battery for toxicopsychological studies.

Research Design: . The research design was ex-post-facto type. The independent variable
was exposure of MIC gas and dependent variables were different psychological parameters, viz,
auditory memory, visual perception/memory/perceptual motor speed, attention/response speed and
manual dexterity. Cohorts were randomly selected from different locations of the affected area of
Bhopal. With the help of research design the effect of independent variable on dependent variable,
i.e. exposure response relationship, was assessed.
From the cohorts chosen for the ITRC study, 350 subjects were selected randomly for
conducting various psychological tests. This sample included subjects from both the sexes and
represented different socio-economic groups and were also drawn from different age groups.
The children were excluded from the study.
The subjects of control group were equally distributed according to age, sex and socioeconomic status, comparable to the exposed population, the only difference being that the subjects
of this group were not exposed to methyl isocyanate or any other toxic or irritant gas.

Psychological Testing

having

The necessary precaution of testing the subjects in a quite, calm and comfortable place
proper light and ventilation without any disturbances from any source was taken. The

274

