exposed and control subjects were studied in the same surroundings. Free conversation with the
subjects was done so that his motivation and cooperation could be ascertained. The tests were
presented in a definite order.

TOOLS
A

Behavioural Test.

Standard behavioural tests used in toxico-psychological studies ware employed. Applicability in this local situation, was the criteria of selecting p3rticular tests for maximum information.
Both central nervous system and peripheral nervous system functions were evaluated on the basis
of these tests. The following core tests were used to test the various psychological parameters:
CORE TESTS

FUNCTIONAL DOMAIN

a. Auditory Memory

Digit Span Test

b.

Benton's Visual Retention test, Raver's
Progressive Matrics

c.

Perceptual Motor Speed

Digit Symbol test, Bourdon Wiersma
Vigilance test

d.

Attention/Response Speed

Simple Reaction Time a. Auditory

e.

Manual

f.

Attention/Vigilance

g.
B

Visual Perception/Memory

Affect

De~terity

b.

Visual

Santa Ana Dexterity Test
Other tests of attention or vigilance
sharing tasks

I time

E.P.I. / Subjective questionnaire

Q.uestionnaire on Subjective SYlDptom&

The test was performed individually with the help of a subjective questionnaire
which was used by Hanninen et al (1976) in their studies on solvent exposed workers at
Institute of Occuptional Health, Helsinki. The questionnaire consists of 47 items grouped accorping to the factor analysis into four scales, measuring general lability, general fatigue with somatic
complaints, lack of extroversive activity and neuroticism.

METHODS
1 Auditory Memory

Digit Span-Subtask of Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and of Wechsler Memory
Scale (WMS) has been widely used in neuropsychology and also in behavioural toxicology. The
subject is requested to recall digit series forward and backward im.nediately after he3ring them.
It is a test of immediate auditory memory.
% Visoal Perception and Visual Memory

Visual memory tests measures visual pattern recognition (visual organization) and
memory for visual pattern. These tests are either recognition tasks where the subject has to match
alternative figures in usually-short term m3mory or visuo-practical tasks where the subject has to
reproduce fjgures from memory. Performance in visual memory tests depends on pattern recognition as much or even more than the memory per second.

275

