Benton Retention Test -It is a well known visual memory test comprising of 10 tasks with
one or three geometric figures to remember in each. In addition to memDry, attention and visual or
spatial ability contribute to the performance. The number of correctly drawn figures is used as
the score.

3

Perceptual Motor Speed

Classic methods for perceptual motor speed and accuracy are papar and pencil tests where
the subject has to scan a test sheet row by row or column by column, searching for and marking
certain target characters as fast and as accurately as possible. These tasks require visual selectivity
and high speed repetitive motor responses and the capacity for sustained concentration.

Digit Symbol Test (DST) : It is a subtask of Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. The test
sheet gives a list in which numb:Hs are associated with certain simple symbols and a list of random
digits with blank spaces below them. The subject is asked to write the correct symbols in the blank
spaees as fast as possible. Digit Symbol Test is generally considered to be one of the most
valid detectors of cerebral dysfunctions.

Bourdon-Wiersma Vigilance Test: The test has a sheet having groups of three, four and
five dots in succesive rows. The task is to strike over all the groups of four dots as accurately and
as quickly as possible. The performance time allowed for full test is only 5 minutes. The number of
omissions and errors are calculated and with the help of a standard formula a score is obtained.
This score represents perceptual accuracy in percentage.
4

Attention/ Response Speed

Simple Reaction Time (SRT) -It is the length of time between the onset of a stimulus and
the execution of the motor response. SRT, thus has both, a sensory and a motor. component. In
behavioural toxicology, SRT has been measured for visual and auditory stimuli; however visual SRT
is the most common method. In addition to the mean or cumulative reaction time, the changes in
reaction time over a space of time provide a sensitive indicator of toxic effects.

5

Manual Dexterity

Coordination visual perception and motor performance is required for this test. The degree to
which either perception or motor performance is prominent varies from test to test. In this test the
quality of psycho-motor performance is the dominant variable.

Santa Ana Test-It originates from the psychomotor test battery of Fleishman and has been
modified and standardized for the purposes of behavioural toxicology at the Finnish Institute of
Occupational Health. The test has a base plate with square depressions and each depression
contains an accurately fittjng peg with a cylindrical upper part. The task is to take one peg in
succession, lift it from the depression, turn it around 180 degrees and put it back. The score consists of the number of pegs turned in two 30-seconds trials. Separate measurements are taken for
the preferred hand, the non-preferred hand, and for both hands at the same time.
6

Attention/Vigilance
It includes other types of tests of attention or vigilance and ti me sharing tasks.

276

