7

Affect
Different personality tests are included in this seri9s like,

Rorschach Inkblot and

Eysenck

Personality Inventory (EPI) and questionnaire for subjectiva symptoms.

STATISTICAL TECHNIQ,UES USED
The following statistical tools were used for the analysis of data
perceptual motor speed. attention/response speed and manual dexterity.

pertaining to memory,

(1) Analysis of Variance-In order to test the significance of the variations among three
different groups, viz. control, exposed male and exposed female, the analysis of variance as

suggested by A.A. Fischer, was worked out.
(2) t- Test - In order to find out the significance of difference betwe:m th3 two groups,
this test is applied' The expression standard error (SE) of the difference between the two groups
is represented by :
SE (diff)

=

EMS (_1

n1

+_,_)
.

n2

where EMS=mean square within groups
n 1 and n2 =denote the number of subjects in the two groups

INTERPRETATION AND RESULTS
MeDlory
(a) Auditory Memory (lmmediate)- Immediate memory scores in females were significanUv
lower as compared to controls, however, no significant difference was observed in males. Overall
immediate memory score (male and female) in the exposed population was significantly lower as
compared to controls. This shows that the effect of exposure in reducing the auditory memory is
likely to be more in case of females than in males (Table 1 a and 1 b).
(b) Visual memory- Immediate memory (visual) is significantly reduced in the exposed population (p L 0.001) as compared to controls. When males and females were compared it was found
that immediate memory is more affected (PLO.05) in males as compared to females (Table 1b).
Overall group results show that immediate visual memory was affected due to MIC exposure.
Delayed memory (visual) was also significantly reduced in exposed population (p L 0.01) as compared to control whereas no significant ~ifferance between male and female was observed indicating that both are equally affected by MIC gas exposure.

Perceptual Motor Speed-Both Digit Symbol Test and Bourdon-Wiersma test measure the
perceptual motor speed. The latter test also includes attention/vigilance as an additional parameter.
In the Bourdon-Wiersma test the changes were significant (p<0.001) while in the Digit Symbol
test no significant changes were observed (Table 2a and 2b). The analysis of the questionnaire and
results of interviews with the exposed subjects revealed that these subjects were having a lack of
concentration and a poor attention. The study also revealed that attention/vigilance was significantly impaired in the population affected by MIC gas.

277

