DISCUSSION
The surviving population from Bhopal gas disaster has not only faced the ill effects of
MIC exposure on their physiologic system but also have witnessed the tragic scenes, where the
nearest and dearest ones were dying helplessly and nothing could be done to save them. Such
ghastly scenes have left very deep impacts on the minds of the surviving population. The effect
obviously is more pronounced in y~ung people, in women, in elderly persons and those who are
emotionally sensitive by nature. This impact has not only affected their thinking and emotions
but also has resulted in a significant effect on their behavioural functions as described above.
Many symptoms like nervousness, headache, palpitation, loss of appetite, insomnia, impotency,
menstrual disturbances etc. observad in the exposed population may be due to the effects of MIC,
but there is strong likelihood that a significant proportion of such symptoms may be only psychogenic in nature caused or precipitated by the unfortunate experiences after the gas tragedy.'
Our results on the psychological tests revealed that the effect on visual perceptual memory
(immediate and delayed) as measured by Benton Visual Retention Test was seriously affected. The
auditory memory was also affected but to a lesser extent. This fact was also confirmed by the
subjective symptoms questionnaire where a significant number of individuals were found to be
suffering from poor memory.
Attention/response speed was also affected due to exposure to MIC. For measuring
perceptual motor speed Digit Symbol Test did not show any significant findings, whereas,
Bourdon-Wiersma Vigilance Test showed significant differences as compared with control. The
reason seems to be that this ~est measures the attention/vigilance as an additional domain along
with perceptual motor speed. Attention/response has shown significant difference as compared
to control in reaction time study. The analysis of the subjective questionnaire has also revealed,
lack of concentration in the exposed population. Thus it seems that attention-vigilance was dominating over perceptual motor speed performance.

tual

The results of behavioural toxicological tests revealed that memory, mainly visual, percepand attention / response speed along with attention/vigilance were severely affected

in population exposed to M IC,
The subjective complaints noted were
difficulty in concentration, confusion, poor
memory, headache, irritability or depression. Difficulty in concentration was the commonest complaint, causing problems at work and at home. Patients, genefally students, found that they were
unable to read a book or concentrate on finer work. They also complained of forgetfulness
viz. forgetting, where they had put a particular thing, telephone number or address or why
they had gone for shopping. Generally symptoms ware at their worst during the first month
after the gas exposure. At the time of testing they were all improving.
A significant change in the behaviour of family members was noted by several housewives.
Both physical and mental factors operating together viz. breathlessness on exertion and difficulty in
concentration forced many a people to a restricted work schedule. Lack of energy and phys ical
capacity to work coupled with mental trauma have resulted in majority of population being turned
into mental and physical cripples. The "gas phobia" or "carbide phobia" has.made the entire population so sensitive that any smell resembling the odour of MIC gas produces a number of psychosomatic symptoms in the population, especially those who are more vulnerable like children, women
and the aged. It remains to be seen how long it will take to restore the mental and physical faculties
of the affected persons to norma Icy.

282

