CASE REPORTS

A team of toxicologist, neurologi~ts, and pathologists from Industrial Toxicology Research
Centre, Lucknow, K.G:s Medical College, Lucknow, and Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal, undertook
detailed clinical examination of patisnts, exposed to M IC (22 males and 11 famales; mean age
38.3 years; range 8-60) for possible ocular and neurological symptoms. The patients ware present
within three kilometres from the Union Carbide plant at the time of the accident, and they belonged
to low or middle socio-economic status. Around midnight most of these patients woke up because
of severe burning in the eyes, irritating cough, dyspnoea and suffocation which soon became
intolerable. Some of the patients, because of anxiety and panic, ran for a safer place and medical
help (14 patients), while the others stayed in their houses and waited for the crisis to pass over
(19 patients). Ophthalmological and respiratory involvement dominated the clinical picture and
in the severely affected patients neurologicaJ involvemant was also observ.ld as reported below.

OBSERVATIONS
Ophthalmological Manifestations
All the patients experienced severe burning in the eyes which was associated with
watering and redness. 73 0/ 0 patients complained of diminution of vision and photophobia, and
24% had pain in the eyes. At the time of examination, all the patients had marked congestion
of the eyes. Keratitis was present in 6 cases and was bilateral in 2. The corneal opacity was of a
macula grade in 4 patients and leucoma grade in 2. Characteristically, only the exposed portion of
the cornea was affected being directly exposed to MIC. On fundus examination, superficial flame
shaped haemorrhages were observed in 2 cases, in both of them, they were in the superior
temporal quadrant. In majority of the cases, the symptoms improved by the third day (range 2-7),
except in 2 in whom they persisted till second week due to severe kera titis.

Respiratory Manifestations
All the patients had severe cough, irritation and dryness of throat, rhinorrhoea, suffocation
and breathlessness. Eighty one per cent of the patients complained of chest pain because of tracheitis
and 73% had excessive frothy excectoration. Ninety one per cent of the patients were markedly
dyspnoeic. Pharyngitis and laryngitis were present in 12% patients and were associated with
difficulty in. swallowing and hoarsness, respectively. Crepitations and rhonchi were present
bilaterally in 94% patients. In 64% patients dyspnoea improved by the fourth day (range 2-7) but
in spite of symptomatic treatment 46% patients were dysponoeic at rest in the second week.

Neurolo gical Manifestations
Severe cf'ugh and dyspnoea were followed by fainting in 55% p3tients. Thl3 duration of
unconsciousness ranged from 30 minutes to 3 days. One patient had prolonged unconsciousness;
he also had myoclonic jerks localised to the right upper extremity and generalised hyperflexia. His
clinical picture was suggestive of toxic encephalopathy. Three patients who had prolonged
unconsciousness (more than 12 hours) had brisk deep tendon jerks and extensor planter response.
Weakness of the legs was present in 2 patients, it was more marked in the proximal muscles; one
patient had difficulty in getting up from the squatting position and the other had difficulty in

283

