walking. In both these cases, the deep tendon jerks ware absent and sens3tions were normal. Mild
to moderate headache (55%), giddiness (46°/0)' burning sensation in hand and feet (90;0) and
hypoaesthesia (3<yo) were also noted.

Miscellaneous Manifes tatio ns
Shortly after exposure to MIC, 64% patients had 1-4 vomitings, 15% had 1-2 loose
motions and 6(% complained of pain in abdomen. The patient with toxic encephalopathy, developed
gastric haemorrhage on/ the fourth day of M IC exposure. Liver enlargement (3 em) was present in
a patient but he did not have jaundice. Of all the cases, 91 % patients had sinus tachycardia
which persisted in the first week. Generalised bodyache and fever wera also present in 120;0
patients during the first week.
By the end of the second week, 3 patients were free of symptoms and were discharged. 29
patients had varying degree of illness and were still in the hospital. One patient died on the eighth
day of MIC exposure; his lung biopsy was done and subjected to histopathological examination.
To study the effect of extent of exposure to MIC on the clinical picture, the physical
activity undertaken by the patient at the time of the accident was assessed in relation to the
severity of the clinical picture. Dyspnoea at rest on the seventh day and history of loss of consciousness were taken as the indicators of the severity of the clinical picture. Th3 statistical
analysis was done by the chi-square test. The proximity of the patient to the accident site was
found to be significantly associated with the severity of the clinical picture, i.e. to dyspnoea at rest
(p<0.1) and loss of consciousness (p< 0.05).
Seventy seven per cent of the patients had polymorphonuclear leucocytosis. Blood urea
was raised in 67(%, SGOT in 26% and alkaline phosphatase in 33% in the first week. The chest
X-ray films of 19 patients were examined. Bilateral patchy consolidation suggestive of pneumonitis
was present in 15 patients while bilateral airspace consolidation suggestive of pulmonary oedema
and prominent bronchovascular markings were present in 2 cases in each group. Left sided
pneumothorax in addition to pneumonitis was present in one patient. Light microscopy of the lung
tissue revealed the necrosis of the lining of respiratory bronchioles which was covered by fibrous
hyaline exudate. Marked destruction of alveoli and areas of pneumonitis were present. The alveoli
were replaced by fibrinous, or haemorrhagic exudate containing red blood cells, polymorphs, lymphocytes and in some of the alveoli, the predominant cells were macrophages. The alveolar septa were
damaged and were replaced by irregular hyalinised fibroconnective tissue. The damaged alveolar
capillaries were seen as reminiscences of the vessel wall around the collection of red blood cells.
At places the features were suggestive of interstitial pneumonitis, characterised by accumulation
of lymphocytes, proliferation of fibrocytes and macrophages along with fibrinous material in varying amount.

Case Report
L. D. P., a 20 year male resident of Ibrahim Pura, Bhopal, woke up at 1 a.m. on 3rd
December because of burning, redness and watering from eyes. This was associated with irritating
cough, suffocation and dyspnoea. He ran around to search his relations and fainted because of
exhaustion in the Military Hospital. On regaining consciousness on 6th, he experienced weakness
in the legs and was unable to stand. He was treated in Hamidia Hospital and improved by 13th
December, 1984, but again developed weakness on 26th December and hence he was admitted on
10th January in the Department of Neurology.

284

