On examination, the patient was of average built and nutrition, had flaccid quadriparesis
with grade IV power, the weakness being more marked proximally. The superficial reflexes were
normal, deep, reflexes- were just present. No abnormality was detected in sensory system. Bowel
and bladder functions were normal.
His hemoglobin was 13 gm%, white cell count 18000/mm3 with 600/0 polymorphs and 400;0
lymphocytes. Vrinalysis was normal; ESR was 4 mm for the first hour; biood WR, VORL was
negative and CSF and Jiver function tests were normal. X-ray film of chest showed heavy bronchovascular marking. X-ray lumbar spine showed spina bifida. His nerve conduction velocity was normal.
Electromyography of quadriceps, biceps and deltoid muscles showed normal pattern without any
spontaneous activity. H is action potentials were normal, ampl itude, duration and interference pattern
was normal. Muscle histology was normal on light microscopy but there were ultrastructural
changes in the myofibrils show~ng irregular 'Z' bands, dilat€d endoplasmic reticulum and small afld
spare mitochondria.
" The patient was given injection of ACTH for 20 days and then followed by tablets of
Prednisone. The patient showed marked improvement, could walk normally and was discharged
on 2nd March 1985.

Fo lIow-up Studies
Three months after the initial examination, 240/0 of these patients could be followed up.
By this time, all the patients were discharged from the hospital but most of them 88% still required
medical supervision and treatment. Rawness in throat and dyspnoea (62.5 (Yo), cough (37 .5~o), reduction in visual acuity (62.5%), "headache (50%), burning in hand and feet (37.5%), depression
and irritability (75%) were the commonly reported symptoms.

COMMENTS
The respiratory involvement in the patients of the present study seemed to be due to the
irritation of the upper respiratory tract, bronchitis and pneumoni~. The radiological picture was
also suggestive of bilateral patchy pneumonia (79%) and pulfl1onaryoedema (1.0.5%). The
histological picture of lung revealed extensive damage to the lining of respiratory bronchioles,
alveolar capillaries and patchy pneumonitis. These obsarvations are generally in agreement with
the findings in the follow-up study presented elsewhere.
Alteration of sensorium was the commonest neurological manifestation. Alteration in
consciousness ranged from 30 min to 3 days and 3 patients who had prolonged unconsciousness
had hyperreflexia and extensor planter response. One patient had clinical features suggestive of
toxic encephalopathy. Neuromuscular weakness was also observed in some patients. ACTH and
prednisone treatment apparently helped recovering from neuromuscular weakness, which suggests
need for further follOW-Up.

285

