DISCUSSION
The results contained in this report are the outcome of a planned, systematic study carried
out by ITRC during Phase-I and Phase-II in February-March, 1985, to investigate the after-effects
of methyl isocyanate exposure on the population of Bhopal. As stated above, systematic
investigations for studying 10 different parameters involving history taking, clinical examination,
chest X-rays, lung function tests, haematological studies, behavioural studies, immunological
studies, biochemical studies and chromosomal studies were undertaken. The subject group studied
during this investigation comprised of Muslims, about 81 %, and H indus about 19%, belonging to
the age group 15 years and above. A large percentage of the entire subject group was in their
mid-twenties and thirties. The majority of the people was in the low socia-economic group.
Complaints related to the respiratory functions and ocular systems constituted the majority.
Symptomatology involving the various physiological systems was analysed in reference to the distance from the factory. The average number of complaints per subject showed a declining trend
with increasing distance. The prevalence of symptoms pertaining to respiratory and gcstrointestinal systems was significantly higher in the population group residing within a distance of 4 km
as compared to those residing beyond that distance.
Lung function tests were carried out using eleven - different parameters. Those who could
not perform the correct technique in spirographic tests were not included in this study. The
prevalence of ventilatory impairment was found to ~e 34% in the male population as against 44%
in females. In case of restrictive lung disease prevalence was 34 per cent. The combined
obstructive-cum-restrictive ventilatory impairment was observed in 22% of the cases out of 783
cases who could perform spirometry. Pulmonary function impairment was predominant in this
subject group. This was evidenced by the FEV/FVC ratio which showed a mean value of 63% in
male population and 64% in female population, thereby suggesting the presence of mild bronchial
obstruction. Thus, this population group exhibited mild, mixed, restrictive bronchial obstruction as
a result of their exposure to methyl isocyanate. From the detailed studies on various spirometric
parameters, this subject group revealed impaired functional capacity of their respiratory tract and
decreased pulmonary function values in the symptomatic male and female population.
The mechanism responsible for causing lung impairment by methyl isocyanate is not clearly
understood. Some investigators believe that MIC has an acute irritating effect on the respiratory
tract resulting in bronchospastic reactions (Baur et ai, 1979). Some other authors have proposed
that isocyanate-induced respiratory disease may be the effect of immunological (Karol et ai, 1978)
and pharmacological (Butcher et ai, 1979) effects of the chemical. Dewair et al (1983) suggested
that inhibition of cholinesterase by isocyanate can be related to the respiratory disorders. Support
for such a concept came from Trevisan and Moro (1981) who reported on th~ role of acetyl
cholinesterase inhibition by TOI.
Out of 739 subjects examined by chest X-ray, 73 showed radiological changes
which are not expected in the general population and, therefore, could be related to their exposure
to MICo Haematol09ical studies showed a higher value of haemoglobin in the majority (670;0) of

286

