the population studied. There was also an increase in red blood cell count in 78% of the subject
group studied. About 12% of the overall subject population showed an elevated total leucocyte
count, ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) was increased in 36% of the overall subject group
studied.
Glutathione level was significantly reduced in 30 % of the population. However, the ceruloplasmin c~:>ntent. was significantly raised in more than '45 % of the population examined. 'A
decrease in glutathione level in this exposed group indicates that the ability to detoxify toxic chemicals in this group has been impaired. An increase in ceruloplasmin content is indicative of some
inflammatory processes going on within t.he body. This could be due to some
under-current
infection in these individuals or to some kind of repair mechanism in progress to repair the
damage caused in the tissues. It may have resemblance also to some changes in haematopoietic
systems (Goodie, 1950, Nriagu, 1980). Among the surveyed population a relatively high level of
creatinine was observed in their urine samples compared to the control subjects. This increase
indicates an increased .rate of breakdown of creatine phosphate, possibly as a result of muscular
distress produced after MIC exposure (Oser, 1965).
A variety of immunological tests were performed to determine the levels of immunoglobulins
q, M and A. On an average these values were similar to those of normal individuals, except
for the fact that about 4 % of cases showed higher IgG values (2847 mg 0;0)' Some (7(%)
cases showed lower IgA values (70 mg%). In 8 per cent of the cases IgM was raised (390 mg%).
Studies on phagocytosis involving peripheral blood mononuclear cells indicated that 40~~ of the
cases had suppressed phagocytic ability. Suppression of phagocytic ability could be extremely
harmful for an individual, since phagocytes render protection against primary infection and help
in the elimination_Qf toxic, unwanted chemicals or biochemicals from the physiological system.
DepressEd phagocytic function would mean that such a subject group would be more susceptible to
infection. A great deal of care and attention, therefore, is needed to protect the exposed population by using effective measures of immunization, vaccination and nutritional supplementation
etc., to increase their immunological competence to fight infection in an effective manner.
Chromosomal studies were conducted using peripheral blood lymphocytes by stimulating
them with phytohaemagglutinin and examining one hundred well spread metaphases from each
case for chromosomal aberration. This study, conducted in collaboration with GSVM Medical
College, Kanpur, indicated that MIC exposure has caused an ~ppreciable degree of chromosomal
aberration (increas~d number of breaks and gaps) compared to an equal number of control
individuals tested for this purpose from Lucknow, Kanpur and Bhopal.
Sophisticated behavioural and psychological studies were conducted on 350 subjects
seleCted randomly. Many symptoms, such as nervousness, headache, perception loss, memory
disturbances etc. were observed in the exposed population. The results of the psychological
was signif!cantly
studies indicated that visual-perceptual memory (immediate and delayed)
affected.
This was confirmed by the subjective questionnaire study in which 250 out
.of 289 cases r~port@p that they were suffering from poor memory. At~ention/Response speed· was
also affected in the exposed population. The results of behavioural toxicological study revealed
that visual memory, perceptual memory and attention/response speed, along with attention
vigilance capacity were affected in the population group exposed to MIC. The major complaints
noted were difficulty in concentration, confusion, poor memory, headache, depression etG· Difficulty

287

