ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are extremely grateful to Dr S. Varadarajan, former Director General, Scientific and
Industrial Research, Government of India for his guidance and help in carrying out the studies.
We are also grateful to Dr A. P. Mitra, Director General, CSIR for his keen interest in this work.
Thanks are due to "Dr Ishwar Das, Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Madhya
Pradesh, Public Health and Family Welfare Department, Mr R. K. Krishnan, Secretary to Chief
Minister, and Dr Nagoo, pirector, Medical Services, Bhopal, for their cooperation and help.
We are thankful to Dr P. K. Rohatgi, Director, Mr A. C. Khajanchi, Scientist Ell and Mr K. l.
Jain, Administrative Officer and either staff members of Regional Research Laboratory, Bhopal for
extending co-operation and help in conducting the studies at Bhopal.
We are indebted to Dr Ravi Prakash, Ex-Vice Chancellor, Bhopal University and Consultant
and Emeritus Scientist, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhopal, for his help in conducting this
survey.
Grateful thanks are due to Mr G. P. Dodeja, Manager, Sharat Heavy El3ctricals Limited
and Dr K. V. Pandya, Chief Medical Officer, SHEL, Bhopal for providing accommodation to our
staff. Our sincere thanks are due to Dr M. I. Khan, his wife Dr. (Mrs.) Zubaida Sultan and staff
and students of Hahnnemann Homeopathic Medical College and Hospital for providing space to
conduct various tests, bringing exposed victims for checkup from various affected areas and all
sort of help needed during our studies. Perhaps without such a help our studies could not have
been possible so smoothly.
Our grateful thanks are due to Dr R. K. Sisaria, Mayor of Bhopal city and the corporators
for their help and constant encouragement.
Our sincere thanks are due to Dr M. S. Agnihotri, Prof. of Tuberculosis" an Chest Diseases,
K. G'.s Medical College, Luckno\V and Dr G. N. Agarwal, Professor and Head, Department of
Radiology K. G:s Medical College, Lucknow for sparing their valuable time in rendering and
interpreting the chest X-ray plates of the exposed population.
We are extremely grateful to Dr S. K. Misra. Dr A. K. Agarwal. Km. Chitra Ag lrw 11 and
Mr H. C. Joshi for compiling and analysing the enormous data collected during the study and
to Km. Sangeeta Chandra for doing the statistical analysis.
Thanks are due to Mr. S. N. Agarwal and his library staff for providing references needed
10r the study and to Mr. Mushleh Ahmed and other staff members of Medical Illustration Section
for making photographs and illustrations.
Sincere thanks are due to Mr L. M. Pandey. Mr S. D. Upadhyay, Mr R. S. Verma and
Mrs. A. Mathew for typing this report.
Lastly we acknowledge with gratitude the extreme degree of cooperation extended to us by
the gas-exposed population of Bhopal who came from far and near for getting themselves
examined by our team.

289

