APPENDIX·I

CHEMISTRY AND TOXICOLOGY
OF METHYL ISOCYANATE
Chemistry of Methyl Isocyanate
Isocyanates (R-N =C = 0) resemble aldehydes and ketones in their affinity for active
hydrogen atoms, but also function as cumulated unsaturated systems thereby making them highly
reactive. Due to this, isocyanates are useful chemical intermediates. Three isocyanates are of major
commercial importance. One is methyl isocyanate (MIC), almost all of which is used to make
carbamate pesticides. The other two are toluene di-isocyanate (TOI) and 4, 4,-diphenylmethane
diisocyanate (MOl) both of which are used almost exclusively to make urethane and isocyanurate
polymers.
TOI and MOl, like MIC, are flammable as well as reactive. MOl and TOI are essentially
non-volatile, unlike MIC which is highly volatile. MIC is a colourless liquid with a sharp odour. It
boils at 39.1 °C (at 760 mm Hg) and has a vapour pressure of 348 mm Hg at 20°C. Furthermore,
although the liquid is slightly lighter than water, the vapour is about twice as heavy as air. If
released, it tends to stay close to the ground as it diffuses from the source. Thus, MIC has a much
greater potential for damage than TOI and MOL
MIC will react with many compounds. The reactions tend to be exothermic and vigorous
(Fig. 1). MIC and water will react to yield methylamine and carbon dioxide. Methylamine reacts
further with M IC or other reaction products to give either 1,3-dimethylurea (with excess water) or
1,3,5-trimethylbiuret (with excess MIC). A trace of acid or base will promote the reaction.
At room temperature, the MIC-water reaction starts off slowly, and is exothermic. Specifically, it produces about 585 Btu per Ib of MIC or about 3700 Btu per Ib of water. If sufficient
quantities of both reactants are present, and if the heat is not somehow removed, the temperature
will go up and the reaction rate will rapidly increase to the point that the MIC will start to boil
violently. In a closed tank, the pressure could build up to the point that relief valves would open,
venting both MIC vapour and carbon dioxide .. If safety' devices fail to operate, or if they were overwhelmed by the amount of vapours being generated, the heavy, noxious MIC vapours would escape
to the atmosphere. MIC in addition to reacting with a great many other chemicals, can also react
with itself. In the presence of a catalyst, pure M IC will form either a cyclic trimer (trimethyl isocyanate) or a gummy, resinous polymer. Extremely pure MIC will spontaneously form a linear polymer.
These reactions also are exothermic. Trimerization, for example, liberates about 540 Btu per
Ib of MIC, equivalent to 54 Kcal per mole of trimer. Any number of substances can catalyze the
reaction: strong bases such as sodium hydrox!de or sodium methoxide, triphenylarsine, triethylphosphine, metallic chlorides and others. However, the reaction rates and the induction periods vary
widely with different catalysts. According to the literature, the time required for complete trimerization, using various catalysts, can range from 10 minutes (sodium methoxide) through one hour
(ferric chloride) to four weeks (4-dimethylaminopyridine). MIC samples contain a small residual
amount of phosgene which inhibits both the reaction between MIC and water and polymerization.
But it also should be noted that the phosgene provides a source of chlorine and that most stainless
steel alloys, although generally chemically resistant, are rather vulnerable to attack by chloride ion.
In theory, at least, that could lead to production of substances that could act as catalysts.

302

