Of the billions of pounds of isocyanates manufactured worldwide each year, the bulk con.
sists of three key industrial materials: toluene di-isocyanate (1'01), diphenylmethane·4,4' -di·isocya·
nate (MOl) and a polymeric form of MOl known as polymethylene-polyphenyl polyisocyanate. These
compounds are used in the polyurethane industry to make foams, elastomers, insulators and
coatings.
US8

MIC is used in the production of pesticides and pharmaceuticals. There is also some application in the production of polyurethane foams and plastics. The major use of MIC is in the manufacture of N-methylcarbamate pesticides such as aldicarb, aldoxycarb, banol, baygon, butacarb,
carbaryl, carbofuran, landrin, larzin, meobal, methomyl, zectran and so on.
Production
The most widely known method for the production of methyl isocyanate is the reaction of
phosgene with methylamine. Phosgene is produced by reacting carbon monoxide (CO) with chlorine
gas. Major producers of MIC are reportedly Union Carbide Corporation (USA) and Bayer (FRG). It
is understood that Japan, the ,R~public of Korea, Taiwan and Israel also have firms producing MIC.
Production figures are unknown.
Several companies around the world are manufacturing.carbamate pesticides such as BASF
(FRG), Bayer (FRG), Drexel (USA), Du Pont (USA), Maag (Switzerland), Makteshim·Agan (Israel),
Mitsubishi (Japan), Nihon (Japan), Pillar (Taiwan), Schering (FRG), Sunko (Taiwan), Union
Carbide (USA, Brazil, France, India). Carbaryl production is also known to take place in USSR.
Occupational and Environmental Hygiene
Severe irritation and corrosion of eyes and skin, nose, throat and the respiratory tract have
been described, overexposure will cause pulmonary oedema and suffocation. Effort increases lung
symptomatology up to suffocation.
Survivors may develop varying degrees of lung fibrosis and respiratory insufficiency. Sensitization to MIC and other isocyanates may occur. Eye damage such as severe keratitis and corneal
ulcer may become irreversible (corneal opacity). Short·term exposures to MIC levels between 10·20
ppm have been reported to be 'unbearable'.
Very few toxicity data have been reported in the medical and scientific literature. No
carcinogenicity studies have been carried out.
No teratogenic effects have been reported.
Metaplasia in the respiratory tract has bJen raported from animal studies.
Environmental Behaviour and Fate
Very little is known about the environmental behaviour and fate of MIC. In contact with
humid air or water, however, rapid decomposition or polymerization to less toxic products Occurs.
No significant MIC residues in air, water and food can therefore be expected.

Treatment of Poisoning
No specific antidote to MIC is available. Suggested treatment upon exposure to MIC should
be as for prevention or treatment of lung oedema; absolute rest and hopsitalisation, administration
of oxygen and positive pressure artificial respiration, administration of spasmolytics, corticosteroid
containing spray, corticosteroids and antibiotics against secondary infection, treatment of eyes with
antibiotics and corticosteroids.

303

