the full blown asthmatic-like attack occurs. The mechanisms are different and the response to
therapy may also be quite different. Whereas, supportive measures suffice for the irritant reaction,
bronchodilator or steroi'd intervention is needed in allergic attack. Immediate removal from exposure
applies in both types of reactions but in the case of the allergic reactions, any future exposure must
be prevented since even minute exposure less than that' measured with currently available methods
may trigger the incident.
No epidemiological study is available in literature involving human population exposed to
MIC. However, some studies had been conducted with toluene di-isocyanate and diphenyl methane
di-isocyanate. The first report in the medical literature appears to be by Fuchs and Valade (1951)
in which 9 cas~s of progressive bronchial irritation, of which 7 went on to develop an asthma-like
syndrome on continued exposure to a mixture of 2, 4 and 2, 6 isomers of TOI. From Germany in
1953,17 similar cases were reported, 13 of them severe and one ultimately fatal (Reinl,1953),
In 1959, 99 cases of respiratory illness were attributed to TOt in a single U. S. plant producing
polyurethane foam (Walworth and Virchow, 1959). Williamson (1965) observed that high c~nce­
ntration of TDI vapour may cause chemical bronchitis with severe bronchospasm. Dernehl (1966)
and Dodson (1971) have classified some of these cases as chemical pneumonitis and have followed
a clinical course similar to that of broncho-pneumonia from bacterial infection. In such cases, secondary bacterial invasion of the inflammed bronchial tree and lungs is very likely to occur. Pulmonary
oedema may complicate the picture. The early German literature contains many descriptions of
individual cases with the above features (Reinl, 1953; Ganz and Mager, 1954; Schurman, 1955).
An implication of the work of Peters and associates (1968, 1970) and of Adams (1970) is
of cumulative impairment of lung function of the workers exposed to TOI. From Canada, Mastromatteo (1965) reported that 12 out of 24 workers in a TOI plant had developed symptoms of TOI
toxicity. From 3 to 7 days after commencement of exposure, these men experienced symptoms
including coryzal symptoms, laryngitis, sore throat, tracheitis, bronchitis and pneumonitis. Six
reql,Jired hospitalization, four patients developed anxiety neurosis, psychosomatic complaints,
depression and even paranoid tendencies. One year following the incident these men had not
returned to full time employment. In accidental exposure to isocyanate fumes in a group of 55
firemen in a factory in which polyurethane foam was b~ing manufactured Mc Kerrow et al
(1976)
noted mainly gastrointestinal, respiratory and neurological symptoms. Fifteen men described
gastro-intestinal symptoms which subsided within 2 days of. onset. Respiratory symptoms were
described by 31 men and were most pronounced during the 3 days after the fire, thereafter tending
to improve. When the men were reviewed at 6 months there wns a suggestion that some of them
might have sustained long term damage to the respiratory tract, and almost four years later 20 men
had permanent respiratory symptoms. Serial measurements of ventilatory capacity revealed a
marked decline in the first 6 months although this was not sustained.
Maxon {1964} studied 7 men who developed acute respiratory symptoms after
exposure to TOI in a plastic varnish factory. Symptoms reported were dyspnoea, chest pain
and wheezing. In addition haemoptysis occurred in 4 patients. A series of timed vital capacity
determinations indicated impairment in 6 out of 7 patients. Subsequent evaluations demonstrated
improvements in some of the patients at first and later some deterioration. In the absence of preexposure baseline studies, it was impossible to assess the degree of late' ·disabling effects of
ex.posure to TOL

308

