The immunochemical response of human subjects to low concentration of di-isocyanate
has been investigated. Results showed that an exposure of about 1.3 ppm/min resulted in an
antibody response whereas an exposure of about 0.9 ppm/min did not. Thus demonstration of
antibodies in the serum -of individuals could be of diagnostic value for a recent exposure to diisocyanate. However, the number of individuals in this study is too small to indicate that the titre
of the antibody found is proportional to the expqsure.
Thirty-eight workers exposed to levels of TOI below the TLV were examined for lung function at the beginning and end of a work day (Monday) by Peters et al (1968). Statistically
sig'nificant decreases occurred in FVC, FEV, PEFR, PEF 50% and 25% of VC. Thirtyfour of these
workers were examined on Friday and it was found that FVC had returned to base line, the FEV 1
was still depressed and the expiratory flow rate was more depressed. Diurnal variation could not
account for these changes. Workers with respiratory symptoms showed greater decrease in FEV1
than workers without symptoms. Similar results were obtained with 111 workers exposed to TOI
during a workshift (Wegmen, 1974). The data showed a dose-response relationship between
exposure and acute respiratory effects. Workers in a factory produ"Cil1g polyuretnane foam have
been studied at 6 month intervals for a period of 18 months, showed re~uction of ventilatory
capacity (Peters et al 1970). Cumulative ~hanges exceeding those associated with aging occurred in
these workers over 6, 12 and 18 months. Symptomatic workers showed a greater response to TOI
than asymptomatic one's and a substantive positive correlation existed between the acute and
cumulative changes in FEV1 •
Complaints of respiratory symptoms amongst workers in a factory using isocyanate to
produce polyurethane foam led to a study of changes in ventilatory capacity in the course of several working days. Mean decrease of the order of 0.18 litre was observed in FEVl in 15 employees dlJring each" of three normal workshifts. No significant changes occurred on days whe~ a
process involving the liberation of isocyanate was stopped, or when the men were given an
oral aminophyline compound prophylactically. An aerosol of isoprenaline failed to reverse the
decrease in ventilatory capacity observed during a normal working day~ Approximately half the
subjects studied were found to show increased bronchial sensitivity to a histamine aerosol, all were
smokers, whereas none of the non-smokers showed a ,significant (more than 10%) reduction in
ventilatory.(,apacity after histamine. Smokers and/or positive histamine reactors among polyurethane
workers tended to show a greater decrease in ventilatory capacity during a working day than nonsmokers and nomeactors (Gandevia, 1963).
A common response from the inhalation of MIC following acute toxic symptoms, is an
asthma like syndrome that develops on subsequent exposure to even minute amounts of isocyanate.
This "immediate" type of hypersensitivity resembles the "wet" allergic reaction commonly
associated with hay fever or plant pollen reaction. In some workers a "delayed" type of response
occurs, consisting of a low-grade-fever, headache and malaise, without a stimulation of secretions
in the respiratory tract. This type of response by contrast, requires a far greater exposure to
activate it than the immediate type reaction (Stokinger and Scheel, 1973).
Immunologic testing of more than 1000 sera in U.S. workers population showed 0.5<;'0
clinical cases of delayed hypersensitivity and 1.5% clinical cases of wet allergic hypersensitivity
occurs ~pon exposure to organic isocyanates. Of the remaining 98% about 30<;'0 showed clinical
signs when first exposed but became asymptomatic on continued exposure. The remaining 60<;'0
developed precipitating antibodies (Gamma globulin G) and also develop immunity without

309

