]r~OIA I

(j)57

\ .. StJ\i IGLE

Dr S Varadarajan
Pres ~efll
t"C.Z1 :Ja'\onal SCIence Acac:my

It is generally not known that some eminent Indian scientists played an
important rote in promoting industrial production through research. ( V Raman,
committed to excellence in all fields and to the autonomy of scientists, created the
Raman Research Institute eschewing government resources and influence. How many
people know that he established a small industrial unit in Ban~alore, manufactunng
and marketing mantles for petro max lamps by installing circular knitting machmes for
cytindncat cotton product, subsequently soaking the material in cerium saLts? The
income generated contributed to the functioning of the Institute for 25 years. In
Calcutta, scientists such as U P Basu and P ( Ray promoted Bengal (hemicals, Calcutta
Chemicals and the Bengal Immunity (ompany to produce fine chemicals, drugs and
vaccines. The Haffkine Institute, with distinguished scientists such as Sir Sahlb Singh
Sokhey, developed biochemlcal therapeutics and vaccines. The Pasteur Instltute at
(oonoor, produced vaccines. The Nutrition Research Laboratories, originally in
Coonoor, had many scientists, <;uch as Prof V Ramalingaswamy and Dr ( Gopalan, who
went on to become heads of the Indian Council of Medical Research. In Jammu and
Srinagar, the Drug Research laboratory, under Col Sir Ramnath Chopra, carried out
extensive investigations into the chemical constituents of plants and marketed several
drugs through a company WhlCh continues to function.
In a spirit of nationalism, scientists trained abroad, such as D~ Khwaja Hameed started
CIPLA, a major pharmaceutical research and production organisation. The Indian Lac
Research Institute promoted production of sheLLac. Prof T R Seshadri who worked with
Sir Robert Robinson in London on the structure and synthesis of natural products used
as pharmaceuticals and dyes created, on his return, active Schools of Research in
Andhra and Delhi Universities, and these have continued to make outstanding contributions. Kasturbhai Lalbhai, an ardent patriot and industrialist in textiles, aware of
the problems of import during the Second World War, arranged to train a cousin at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, and started Anil Starch, producing starchbase and textile auxiLiaries. Cellulose Products in Ahmedabad, and Laxmi Starch in
South India, represented such offshoots.
Industrialists in Bombay such as Tata, (hinoy, Wadia, and Darbari Seth, have aLL
promoted Indian technology and chemicaL industry. G M Modi in Meerut, Girdhar lal
and lala Shri Ram in Delhi, diversified into alkali chlorine, and hydrogenated oil
industries, as did Seshasayee in South India and G 0 BirLa in Bengal and Western
India. Industrialists from Chettinad in South India started educational technology
institutlOns (AnnamaLai UniversitYI Alagappa Chettiar College of Technology) and
chemical and fertiliser industries such as Parry and Co, and Southern Petrochemicals.
Travancore State with its enlightened policy on education and science also promoted
manufacture of fertilisers, rayon, aluminium and titanium. The Princely State of
Baroda established a Universlty and promoted modern industries. Some industrialists
of Bombay, such as Sir Vithal Chandavarkar, promoted training and research in textiles,
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, dyes and vegetable oils through a new University Department of Chemical Technology_ Similar initiatives were taken in Kanpur by industrialists
l

l

India's technological advances
owe much to the
inspiration and
patnotlsm of
her scientists

