INr~OVATr:tlNDIA I

WIOEANGLE

58
such as Singhania of JK Industries, promoting
gathered. Prof Venkataraman continuer:! further
the Hartcourt Butler Institute of Technology,
research and pioneered the developmer.:t and
Kanpur University, and the National Sugar Insti- manufacture of synthetic dyes. He has iecorded
tute and in Nagpur by Jamnalal Bajaj through
these in the 26 monumental volumes on the
the Nagpur Institute of Technology.
chemistry of synthetic dyes. The produroon of
India was an exporter of vegetable oils until
synthetic dyes, intermediates and bask raw
1956. All those engaged in oit mHling and
materials from coat tar by numerous large,
vegetable oils produced electrolytic hydrogen,
medium al1d small units resulted. Textile auxilfor hydrogenated edibLe fats to supplement
iaries, detergents, and emulsifiers, were added
milk-based ghee. They were also manufacturers
to the List with investments by textile manufacof soaps (TatD OH Mill, Calcutta Chemical, Modi, turers and their families and employees..
Sarabhai Swastik Godrej, Lever). Hydrogen was
Production units were established in Ol.'ter
obtained from alkali units and chlorine led to
Bombay and Pune, as well as in many rentres
hydrochloride, bLeaching powder, chloro-hydrosuch as Vapi, Bulsar, Surat, Ahmedabad. Rajkot
carbons and PVC with carbide-based acetylene.
and Baroda.
Scientific equipment for experimental work was
Soon after independence, the need for new
designed and fabricated by scientists with
technologies and products became app~rent.
skilled technicians. Raman, J C Bose, and MN
New petroleum refineries with total tecmology
Saha made their pioneering discoveries in this
were established in Bombay and Vizag20atnam
way. The construction of a mercury vacuum
initially and subsequently in other coascal
pump by Venkateswaran led to the Waran pump. locations in Madras and Cochin. Apart from the
Scientific instruments production was ushered
discovery of oil from a surface leak in Dighboi,
by Toshniwal and Andhra Scientific Company
and the later construction of a 0.3 million
tonne fractionation unit by the Assam Oil
from laboratory experience. Skitls in glass
Company, exploration for petroleum in India
blowing and lens grinding were imparted to
students.
was not favoured by any foreign companies.

Scientific equipment

Oil expLoration

There are numerous instances of total technologies before independence in local raw material
based chemical processes, and isolated cases of
scientific measuring equipment, because of the
demands for consumables.The manufacture of
capital goods other than building materials,
small arms and boats was not widespread. Even
in buildings other than bricks, cement and
structural steel, items such as ceramics, pipes,
valves, sanitary fittings, fans and electrical
components, induding bulbs, were imported.
The exceptions were S L Kirloskar, T V
Sundaram, and PSG Naidu, who introduced
rotating machinery. Ship building continued in
Mazagaon, Surat, and Hubli, although all
instruments, engines and equipment were
imported.
A significant initiative for the growth and
diversification of the chemical industry in
Western India arose from the close association
of Prof KVenkataraman, then Director of the
Bombay University Department of Chemical
Technology, and Dr Pai, a member of the Allied
group of scientists, during the study of records
of the German chemicaL giant Badische Anilin
Soda Fabriken: immediately after the end of the
war in Europe. Details of the technological
processes for the production of numerous
synthetic dyes and pigments for textiles were

Then came the discoveries of very large
petroleum oil and gas reserves in new lncations
in the Persian GuLf, Middle East, Siberi2~
Nigeria, Algeria, Mexico, Brazil, VenezuELa and
in the offshore North Sea. Thls changed the
picture regarding energy availability, sbrage,
transport and usage. The Low price inifally
prevailing with oversupply allowed a V-Q-t
expansion of petroleum refining, gas mctionation, gas liquefaction and the repLacemEnt of
coal as a raw material for chemicals ant as a
source for raiL transport, electrical pOWEr generation, and as fuel for heat and cooking. As
solid coal use needs ash disposaL, and the
cleaning of flue gases to meet new stringent
environmental standards, petroleum oil and gas
based technologies made a Significant rreadway.
As oil fluids are of uniform composition. the
economies of scale of production in chemicals
and energy have radically altered. Batch
processes are replaced by continuous processes.
The potential role of petroleum, was rerognised
in India by the then Oil Minister K 0 Mataviya.
Supported by Jawaharlal Nehru, ·the mirnTster
paved the way for establishing the Oil and
Natural Gas Commission in 1956 for the exploration, production and processing of oil and for
conversion of this resource into to majoli
chemicals, polymers, and fibre products..

