WIDEANGLE

in the two decades after 1960.
Onshore oil and gas discovery in Gujarat in
During this period of about 15 years, tlrere
Western India led within seven years to the
establishment of an inland refinery in Baroda
were many instances of medium size OTganisaunder the government-owned Indian Oil Corponons evolving their own processes ahd
ration, with Russian technology and equipment; products, mainly of a non-capital goods nature,
it provided Indian engineers with an excellent
towards self-reliance, self-sufficiency and some
opportunity to be associated with the transport export. Most of these utilised naturaL lncal
of heavy large equipment, and its erection,
resources which had not been well deVfloped or
joining, testing, commissioning and operation.
even identified. The country became a major
The Russian Agency accepted the concept of
producer of essential oils, natural and 5ynthetic
total technology delivery responsibility while
terpenic perfumery and flavour materials utilisutilising Indian services. This experience in the
ing, among others, pine oils, citronella"
Indian public sector oil processing industry has
palmarosa, citrus, linaLoe berry, geranium,
blossomed into a major internationally accepted .. lemongrass, and vetiver. The industry has grown
sophisticated capability.
several fold with substantial technological
At a time when coal was the major resource for
advances. Likewise organisations such Q the
chemicals, the sustained efforts of a group of
Indian associate of Unilever identified many
scientists, technologists and engineers at
unusual seed oils and developed technc:(ogies
Sindri, situated in the area of coal mines,
for augmenting suppLies of oils for industrial
outlined processes for the preparation of
use. An outstanding example is also the develammonia fertilizers. They formed part of the
opment and growth of non-soap detergfnt in a
large Government-owned Fertilizer Corporation
bar form in India representing a world-rlass
of India as a research, development, and design innovation. There are successes stories '"elating
to textile auxiliaries, additives, and mooifiers,
engineering project organisation.
and food colours and dyes. Others relaE to
Catalysts
leather and leather goods with strong t.:chnoThey were able to develop and produce several
logical development from the Central Leather
high quality cataLysts for use in the production
Research Institute.
of ammonia and products such as urea and
Milk revoLution
ammonium suLphate and phosphate. SeveraL
Another breakthrough was in milk and milk
manufacturing plants were also established in
different parts of India. This experience of local products, covering the full range of animal
husbandry, collection from small farme5 and
development was valuable. The availability of
processing. Dr V Kurien provided a dyn2-nic
petroleum gas, fuel oil and naptha made such
leadership and worked out the entire or:eranon
basic materials more attractive from 1970
including the production of stainless stfel
onwards, when in co-operation with a major
vessels and other capital equipment. A -nllk
Italian project organisation, larger single
revolution was thus ushered in by the :Indian
stream energy efficient ammonia plants were
Dairy Corporation and the Kaira MiUc Producers
designed and constructed. A similar design and
project service organisation has been developed Co-operative.
by Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd. The The Government of India recognised the
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research has increased demand for petroleum products as
fuel for lighting, cooking and transport as well
grown to be the major research and developas for efficient fertiliser manufacture. The
ment organisation. Processes deveLoped for
Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals sutIPorted
batch production of basic aromatic organic
the move'to upgrade Indian capabilities by
chemicals have been absorbed, adapted and
forming a partnership with Bechtel USA.. Thus a
improved. The conversion of a laboratory
research preparative process needed substantial company named Engineers India ltd. W-cS established. The original objective of building five
pilot plants, design engineering and equipment
energy efficient high capacity nitrogen fertiliser
fabrication capabilities. These had to be developed by professional design engineering project plants from 1966 onwards did not frucmy and
Bechtel withdrew from the partnership transferorganisations, not available in India during the
ring its shares to the government.. Engirueers
first quarter century after Independence. There
India concentrated on petroleum refining,
were very few units capable or fabrication of
petrochemicals, poLymers and fibres.
reactors, heat exchangers, furnaces, valves, and
Two
other major initiatives by the government
instruments and these could not easily be
through
the Ministry were directed to maximise
imported due to the need to conserve currency

