r:.::ANGLE

60
technology deLivery from highly co-ordinated
Indian effortS. The first was the formatlOn of
the fully government-owned Indian Petrochemicats Corporation Ltd in June 1969 to produce
intermediates for the production of polyester
and a major complex induding olefins from a
naptha cracker and other pLants for conversion
of olefins to polymers such as linear polyethylene, potypropylene, polybutadine rubber,
poLyvinyl chloride and olefin based acrylonitrile
and its conversion to acrylic fibre. Production
of other major chemicals such as linear alkyl
benzene (made only in Spain at that tlme) and
ethylene oxide/glycoL was also planned. Only
very small quantities of nonlinear polyethylene,
PVC and polyester had been produced in the
country at that time. The second major decision
was in each case to purchase processes and for
some items basic engineering only. All common
systems for 18 different utilities and processing
of effluents and byproducts, as well as the
overall integration of the entire complex including storage and safety was assigned to IPCL.

Detailed engineering
The entire detailed engineering, requiring over
three million man hours, as well as procurement, inspection, certification during fabrication in supplier plants, construction planning
and supervis.ion of erection at site services were
assigned to Ell, in addition to basic engineering for some projects and in total utilities and
infrastrucTUre. From 1972 the National Committee on SC1ence and Technology formulated
strategles to meet needs of self-reliant growth
in every sector, under the dynamlC leadership of
the then t·\lnister, Mr C Subramaniam. Excellent
detailed reports resulted from close interactlons
with hundreds of scientists, technologists,
engineers and leaders in education, research
development and industry. Such national
consultations and commitment to a vision of
science-based development led to policies for
rapid achlevements. These are reflected ;n the
commitments in ElL and IPCL. The Department
of Science and Technology was established to
implement the plans.
A four-member action committee on public
enterpnses was established, under the chairmanshlp of 1-1 5 Pathak who simultaneously held
the positions of Member, Planning Commission,
and Chairman ard Managing Director, Ell.
Several public sector enterprises in each sector
were merged. Ailmg private units in cotton,
jute textiles and pharmaceuticals were acquired
by government for rehabilitatlon. An action
plan for research and development in such

enterprises was prepared. Among those engaged
in this rapid transformation, a key role was
played by lovraj Kumar, the first Rhodes Scholar from India, who, after association with the
oil industry through Shell in Bombay, joined
the Government. He led a group to support Ell
and IPCl from the early '60s and functioned as
a non- executive member of their Boards. He
promoted Linkages between pubtic sector
companies, universities and research institutions.
The development of IPCl by successfuLly mobilising a very large number of Indion industnal
units to accept challenges for des.gn and fabrication of complex special items of equipment
generated high motivation within the company,
Ell and others involved. New project teams for
each of the 15 projects in both companies
accepted near impossible targets and 70-hour
working weeks. The group in operations of the
plant for xylene and terephthalate achieved
record production and profit, restoring overall
confidence.

MaLaviya's role
K 0 Malaviya patiently absorbed the details of
the deveLopments and potential in petrochemicals and arranged an audio-visual presentation
to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, all senior
Ministers and Planning Commission Members in
the Prime MlOister's Committee Room in August
1975. The room, little altered since 1926, had
to be provided with electrical wiring for pLug
points to enable the use of audio-visual eqUlpment. This resulted in the release of nnarClal
resources and government interest in the use of
polymer fibres for nationaL development in
sectors such as water conservatlOn, agriCUlture,
food storage, health and medicine, energy,
transport, housing, education, telecommunkations and national security.
Earlier these materials had to be imported and
there were severe restrictions on such imports.
Several new measures were taken, such as the
creation of the Central Institute of Plastics
Engineering and Technology at Madras, with
Regional Centres. A NationaL Committee on
Plastics in Agriculture helped to promote the
use of plastics by farmers and in water management, food packaging and transport. Plastic and
fibre processing equipment manufacture
received attention. Large numbers are empLoyed
in small units in acrylic fibre knitting and in
fabrics and garments production. Emptoyment
generation and economic development from
these has been very high with small investments. Similarly a project on polyester filament

