"l I DEANGLE

61
yarn promoted by IPCL as a new corporation
joint efforts of NCl, IPCL and EIL resulted in
adjacent to the olefin complex added 3500
successful production on a large scale of a~[
tonnes of yarn to the meagre 1200 tonnes
these despite the risks of corrosion and exoloavallable in 1978 and made the material availsive heat generation in unexpected polym~risa­
able, overcoming shortages and high prices.
tion. The Central Electrochemical Research
These imtlatives were successful. The polyester
Institute of the CS~R and the Bhabha Atonic
yarn and fibre production exceeded one million
Research Centre contributed in corrosion
tonnes per annum in 1998 and prices have
prevention technologies.
been continuously reduced.
Another breakthrough was the development of
The implementation of the IPCL cracker complex new high performance catalysts for hydrocarbon
projects involved generation of entirely new
reforming and isomerisation. This was ach~eved
capabilities in the country in the fabrication of through co-ordinated efforts by the NCL, h'1e
a wide range of items of equipment to internaIndian Institute of Petroleum of the (SIR and
tional standards. Several public and private
the IPCL. These were then manufactured by
sector engineering companies were given orders IPCL and used in several refineries and in IPCL
for supply of equipment not made by them
itself. This laid the base for further develDothen, on an understanding they would obtain
ment, international co-operation and expert of
know-how and technology. In other cases, IPCL technologies in a highly sophisticated anti
arranged for expertise from abroad and provided competitive area. CataLysis has also been tile
large loans to such companies for acquiring
interest of the Fertilizer Corporation of IniIfa at
machines needed. Stagewise inspection at the
Sindri, situated amidst coaL mines. It has
production units and constant requalification of provided major catalysts in the fertiliser induswelders as well as raw materials such as steel,
try. Research studies in lISc Bangalore ann later
SS sheets, special alloy tubes, valves, pumps,
in the Indian Institute of Technology, Khcragmotors, and flameproof fittings enabled supplipur, were very valuable. India is among tte
ers and fabricators to meet quality standards.
leading countries in homogeneous and he:erogeneous catalysis R&D and is providing many
Cracker
technologies
in chemical, petroleum, gas.
Notable among these units are those of Bharat
petrochemical,
fertiliser, pharmaceutical. and
Heavy Electricals Ltd in Tiruchi and Hyderabad.
pest
control
agent
industries and for mee:ing
Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels Vizag, KGF
environmentaL
standards
in power generaion,
Bangalore, Bharat Pumps and Compressors
primary
metals,
metal formir.g
automobiles,
Allahabad, Larsen and Toubro, Kaveri Engineercasting,
foundry
and
glass
ceramic
industf.es.
ing, Kota Instruments and BestobeL Similarly
Separation process
several new Indian groups were mobilised to
carry out major projects of mechanical erection, Another important development is in the
one for each of the 15 projects and additional
involvement of ElL in separation processes. The
groups for 18 shared utilities systems. About
Heat and Mass Transfer DlVision designed ',alve
800 persons were trained to qualify as Class I
trays for distillation columns and arrang~ for
welders by IPCL. Many moved to West Asia to
their fabrication by Godrej Ltd Bombay from
meet very large demands in processing oil and
1975 and instaLLation in units in IPCL and
gas and yet about 200 could be available at
refineries for high efficiency separation and
2ny time to the mechanical erection contracpurification of fractions of liquids and liquefied
gases. Constant improvements are being made
tors. National and private scientific research
to remain competitive internationally. Motecular
institutions provided vital inputs. The Departsieves for separation and drying have been
ment of Aeronautics of the Indian Institute of
deveLoped by ACe. ElL is also assisting in a
Science carried out wind tunnel tests to determine destructive resonance vibrations on
project on water desalination by membranes in
models of a pair of towers resulting in a change co-operation with the Central Salt and Maine
of distance of separation from the original
Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar# and
plan. The Associated Cement Company R&D
Madras Refineries Ltd. Total technology fur
Centre in co-operation with IPCl developed
large scaLe liquified petroleum gas production
molecular sieves and arranged to supply them.
in India was accomplished in 1978 by ElL and
The National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, develresulted in the establishment of plants in Uran
near Bombay by ONGC and their operation by
oped basic process designs fer manufacture of
four acrylate esters by IPCl for which technolo- IPCL personnel. Addition of many such units
from Bombay High Gas has led to very h:gh
gy from other sources was not availabLe. The

