f"·~",,,,,,,,,,,,.r

\'•. -..ANGLE

tr~DIA I
62

increase in local production of LPG and in the
entire equipment suppLied from Indian sources.
Recognition of these capabilities got ElL
assignments in Algeria and Abu Dhabi as the
managers for LPG and Liquefied natural gas
projects then being executed by US and
Japanese companies. An unusual case of
technological knowledge and delivery experience was the iron ore water sLurry pipeline in
Karnataka, transporting ore to Mangalore port
for export to.lran in 1977-80. An R&D and pilot
project initiated by ElL in the Regional
Research Laboratory Bhubaneswar in Orissa
gave some basic insights which could be
applied to the Karnataka Project with specifications evolved by Canadian Metchem. These were
revived by ElL and the plant has been operated
successfully. There are numerous opportunities
for such transport of coal, ores and byproducts
in non-ferrous metaL units. In winter, slurry
problems in waxy crude in the Bombay High
transport pipebnes to Mathura Refinery near
Delhi often need remedial measures.

BLood bags
A remarkable institution developed by Prof M S
Valiathan, the distinguished medical research
scientist and heart surgeon, is the Chitra
Tirunal Centre for Medical Science and Technology at ThlrUVanar'lthapuram in Kerala on the
south west coast of India. The technology wing
is renowned for its development of a PVC
speClal polymer bag for human blood colLection,
storage and transport.
Technology was delivered to a new company for
manufacture of one million bags in 1986 at a
time when such technology and production was
limited to Japan and Korea. The technology has
revolutionised blood availability for critical use
and has allowed increased production to five
million bags per annum. Technology is being
transferred to other developing countries.
EquaUy brilliant has been the evolution of
deslgn, fabrication and testing to meet the
highest internatlOnal standards, of the Chitra
Heart Valve, and its manufacture in India.
CIBA recognised the potential for new drugs
from natural materiai after the extraordinary
success of its Reserpin The company started a

major modern research centre in Bombay 196L
It was inaugurated by Pandit law;harlal Nehru
in the presence of several Nobel laureates,
induding Robert Robinson, Vladimir Prelog,
Robert Woodword and Alexander Tndd. Under
the direction of Prof T R Govindacrrari, who had
worked with Roger Adams, a brilliant team of
organic chemists and biologists at the centre
trained a large number of researders. The
centre did not continue but its srientists have
worked in many research instituti:ms related to
industry in fine chemicals. India has built up
significant capabiLities in the sec-..ors of
synthetic drugs, agrochemicals. s:1eciality
chemicals, synthetic dyes, and tE'{tite auxiliaries. The Indian Institute of ChEmical Technology, Hyderabad, the NCl, and the Central Orug
Research Institute, Lucknow, have demonstrated
expertise for total technoLogy dE'Jelopment and
transfer also in hydrogen cyanide. and cyanuryl
chloride.

State support
Technological capability is acnlE'ied through
state support and by creating an appropriate
investment climate for commerC=al companies.
The contracts given by the gov€:'11ment to
aircraft and defence systems conpanies for new
developments allowed a large write-off. In
many countries, companies are =ree in any year
to decide on the percentage of o..aim for depreciation of capital assets and de:uction from
profits. These encourage high-rhk high-profit
ventures in frontier areas. GoYe'11ments 1ave
prmoted mergers of related buS=nesses to evolve
strong national companies, as iliT in aircraft
automobiles, chemicals, telecoruT and computers
in Europe and America.
And as for the Intellectual Pro~rty Rights.
their non-operation in Eastern i::urope and in
specific sectors in some countfes in Western
Europe, the Far East and (enmL/South America
for one to four decades before 1980 contributed
to self-reliance. The Hippocratit Oath taken by
practitioners of medlcine and surgery enjoins
them to apply knowledge and skills and propagate and transfer them openly_ Such standards
are now regarded by many as iGlhibitory to
innovations and to the progress of mankind •

