HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

The Government of India announced its decision
in 1973 to set up a 6 million tonne per year Petroleum
oil Refinery at Mathura under the Indian Oil Corporation
Ltd. (I.O.C), a company wholly owned by the Government
of India. Some apprehensions were expressed about the
possible adverse effects on the h~storic monuments in
the Agra-Mathura region from the gaseous emissions to be
discharged from the Refinery. These monuments include the
Taj Mahal, and the palaces and buildings in Agra Fort,
Itimad ud- Daula Sikandra and Fatehpur Sikri. An Expert
Committee
constituted by the Government of India
conducted studies on the atmospheric air quality in the
region and estimated the extent of release of various
components in the gaseous emissions.
Based on
the
recommendations contained in the Report of the Expert
Committee on the Environmental Impact of Mathura Refinery
published in December 1977,
two 10 MW coal based power
plants in Agra were dismantled and the Indian Railways
replaced coal based
locomotion by diesel based
locomotion in the marshalling yard in
the area.
The
level of sulphur dioxide (annual average) was reduced
from about 15 micro grams/ cubic meter to 8 micrograms/
cubic meter as a result of such action.
2.
The WHO-recommended levels of sulphur dioxide
at that
time
was 60 micrograms/cubic meter.
The
Committee however stipulated that the levels in the Taj
Mahal and adjoining monuments area should be maintained
below 30 micrograms/cubic
meter. The Committee also
advised the Refinery that gaseous emissions of sulphur
dioxide should not exceed 1000 kg/hr.
At such a level,
the Expert Committee, based on investigation carried by
Tecneco of
Italy and the National Environmental
Engineering Re'search Institute (NEERI) of India concluded
that the contribution from the Refinery to the long term
corrcentration of Sulphur dioxide would be of the order 'Of
1 to 2 micrograms/cubic metre as compared to the then
existing level of 15 to 20 micrograms/cubic
meter in
Agra.
Short term (one hour) peak concentration of the
order of 65 micrograms/cubic meter could be expected
under the worst metereolog~cal conditions in winter in
the Taj Mahal area, and the frequency of such occurences
are 2.0 to 4.0 per cent for Agra reglon and 0.0 to 1.0
per cent for Bharatpur blrd sanctuary.
The Refinery

