PUBLIC INTEREST LEGAL ACTION
9.
A Writ Petition (C) No. 13381 of 1984 filed
by Shri M.e.Mehta in the Supreme Court of India in 1984,
in which
Union
of India
and others were named as
Respondents, was called for hearing by the Supreme Court
on 11 February 1994. The Petitioner had submitted that
air pollutants were being allowed to be emitted through
chimneys, ducts, flues and other types of
outlets,
thereby causing destruction to the Taj, endangering the
lives of the people living in and around Agra and
Mathura, and the wild life in Keolodeo National Park, at
Bharatpur. He had consequently prayed that the chimneys
and other outlets of the Mathura Refinery may be closed
down, or that the most polluting units of the Refinery
be shifted to the Etawah region. He had further prayed
that the foundries and Thermal Plants be closed or
shifted to some other locations.
Among the further
prayers of the petitioner were that the area in question
should be declared
as an Air Pollution Control Area,
that pollution standards may be
identified to check
pollution and that a body of independent
experts be
instituted to ascertain whether
necessary safeguards
with respect to prevention of air pollution were being
implemented and that the findings of the expert body may
be circulated from time to time.
10.
Additional Solicitor General of India Shri
V.R.Reddy had submitted to the Court that NEERI may be
asked to examine the
possible ef fects of the use of
Propane gas as a safe fuel in industries in place of
coal/coke in the Agra Region to reduce
atmospheric
pollution.
On the directions of the Court, NEERI
submitted after certain studies a Technical Report on
"Issues
Associated with Fuel Supply Alternatives for
Industries in Agra- Mathura Region" on March 7, 1994.
Extracts from the Report are placed in Annexure IV. It
recommended shifting of small scale polluting industries
outside the Taj Trapezium zone on industrial
estate
sites to be identified by the Government of Uttar
Pradesh, and provision of natural gas for industries in
Agra Mathura Region and Mathura Refinery. On March 31,
1994, a list of 852
industries in the Agra-Ferozabad
region identified by the Uttar Pradesh Government was
submitted to the Supreme Court.
On April,
1994
the
Court ordered:
"We are of the view the shifting of industries from
the
Taj Trapezium
to be made in a phased manner.
NEERI's report indicates that the maximum pollution to
the ambient
air around Taj Mahal is caused by the
industries located in Agra.
We, therefore, as a first

