phase, take up the industries situated in Agra for the
purposes of the proposed shifting outside Ta] Trapezlum.
NEERI in Table IV (A) of
its report has glven the
details of alr pollutlng industrles ~n Agra".
"Before we take a final decision on the question of
shifting of these industries from Agra to outslde the Taj
Trapezium,
it is necessary to inter-act with the
concerned industries."
11.
On April 29, 1994, the Supreme Court made the
following observations in their Order,
"We have specifically stated in the above quoted
order
that no final decisl.on has yet been taken
regarding shifting
of the industries from Agra to
outside the Taj trapezium.
Efforts are being made to
free the prestigious Taj from
pollution, if there is
any, because of the industries
located in and around
Agra. It is further clear from our order that the basis
of the action initiated by this Court is the NEERI's
report which was submitted to the Government of India in
July, 1993.
The said report was prepared under
the
guidance of Dr. P. Khanna and the Project leaders were
Dr.A.L.Aggarwal and Dr.Mrs.Thakare.
In addition, there
was
a team of 30 top scientists partlcipating in the
Project.
NEERI in its report has found as a fact that
some of the industries located in the Taj Trapezium are
the source of pollution causing damage to Taj Mahal.
We are of the view that it would in the interest of
justice to have another investigation/report from a
reputed technical/Engineering authority.
Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India may examine
this aspect and appoint an expert authority from (India
or abroad) to undertake the survey of the Taj Trapezium
Environmental Area
and make a report regarding the
source of pollution in the Trapezium and the measures to
be adopted to control the same. The authority can also
identify the polluting industries in the Taj Trapezium.
We I therefore I request Mr. Kamal Nath, Minister Incharge I
Department of Environment
and Forests, to personally
look into this matter and identify the authority who is
to be entrusted with this job.
This must be done wi thin
three weeks from the receipt of this order."
APPOINTMENT OF EXPERT COMMITTEE:
12.

The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government
of
India
has,
through
its offlce
memoranda
No.Q-17012/21/93-CPW
dated 18 May 1994 and

