the Committee and the Experts who were invited to provide
their views.
18.
The Commlttee has also studied carefully the
orders of the Honourable Supreme Court of India in the
Writ Petition (c) No.13381 of 1984 dated lOth September
1993 and 11th February
1994,
the scientific studies
related to the above writ Petition.
A report on "Air
Pollution by Industries in Taj Trapezium Zone (T.T.Z)"
prepared by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Commissioner, Agra Division, constituted by the Chief
Secretary,
Government of Uttar Pradesh, has been made
available to the
Commi ttee by the Chief Secretary.
(Annexure VII).
19.
To meet the needs of maintaining high
standards of air quality and to further improve upon
them, it is necssary that
further commercial habitat,
transport and industrial developments, including those
designed for growth in employment and economic growth of
the Region through a variety of steps such as tourism,
are so designed as to contribute to the enhancement of
the quality of the environment and the invaluable
heritage.
The Committee has outlined a number of
measures to secure these in the short, medium, and long
action term, based on the experience in the world over
in regard to Heritage Sites. A further set of measures
are designed to avoid sources for accidental, sudden and
irrevocable damage to the Heritage.
Volume I of the
Report contains the State of Monument and changes in it
during the last fifty years. (Annexure VIII).

STATE OF MONUMENTS AND CHANGES DURING THE LAST 50 YEARS
20.
The Committee had opportunities to visit all
the five mentioned monuments. Visits to the Taj Mahal
were made at night,
early morning, late afternoon and
evening.
Through the courtesy
of the Archeological
Survey of India, it was possible to go to
the top
terrace and inspect the Central Dome as well the Four
smaller chhatris. The hollow space in the Double Dome
was also visi~ed. The Committee also visited Sikandra,
Agra Fort, Itimad ud- Daula, and Fatehpur Sikri.
21.
The Committee has received responses from
Dr.S.K.Mohapatra, Secretary, Department of Culture, who
is also currently holding charge as Director General of
Archeological
Survey of India, endorsing the views of
Srnt.Achala Moulik, Additional Director General (Admn.)
(Annexure IX).
The Committee also arranged for three
experts namely, Shri B.N.Tandon, former Joint Director
General and Director Science,
ASI, Shri R.Sen Gupta,

