27.
The visual impression of the Taj Mahal varies
according to the time of the day.
Around sunrise and
sunset the sunlight and the appearance of the sun itself
depends on the
angle.
As the light passes through a
larger layer of atmosphere,
it varies between red,
orange and yellow; when the sun is at higher levels in
the sky, the light is white. The monument reflects light
accordingly.
Photographic reproductions also vary
according to such light or
the type of colour
film/exposure conditions.
28.
The preservation and cleaning process has been
extended
into the inner marble cladding of walls by
erection of
scaffolding.
However the curved dome's
lower side cannot be covered by marble cladding as heavy
marble cannot be fastened by
mortar or dowels.
Therefore the inside top of the upper portion of the
cenotaph is covered with white plaster and has deposits,
presumably from oil lighting. This can only be removed
by slow repeated organic solvent treatments as has been
done at Itimad ud-Daula.
29.
The red sandstone does not have the strength of
marble.
It gets chipped off due to weathering,
sandstorms and
other strains.
Floors and some walls
show more deterioration.
These are replaced regularly
in the Taj Mahal as well as in other monuments. While
marble jalis have generally been strong and have been
unaffected, many red sandstone
jalis break or show
cracks, and are replaced through very careful replicas
made by highly skilled artisans.
30.
It is noted that rainfall immediately washes away
much
dust or particulate matter on surfaces and the
monument clearly reflects the highly clear surfaces.
31.
The number of visitors to the Taj Mahal is about
7500 per day, and on Fridays, when entry is free, it
increases to about 10 I 000.
It may be appropriate to
consider closing entry one day in a week or fortnight to
allow for cleaning and maintenance. If a mobile crane
or a modern easily assembled and dismantled platform can
be
provided and adequate funds are made available I
periodic surface clay pack cleaning can be conducted and
the high central inner area curved surface with plaster
covering can also be fully cleaned. Visitors need not
be allowed into the lower crypt containing the tombs as
the stairway is very narrow, the crypt is
not
ventilated, and is relatively without any daylight.
Entry into the replicas area on the upper level would
meet the needs of tourists.

