64. The unreliability of power supply has necessitated
the
continuous use of diesel generators by the Air
Quality Monitoring
Unit of the UP Pollution Central
Board at the Taj Mahal.
The office
of the
Superintending Archeologist as well as many Government
offices and residences invariably have generating sets.
The older sets use petrol or kerosene. The newer ones
utilise HSO, which has relatively high sulphur of 0.5 to
O. 7 per cent. Hotels, shops
restaurants, especially
those with air conditioning, have large generators.
Petroleum Products
65.
Information on the increase in the consumption of
total
petroleum products in the. area is given in
Annexure xv. Petrol and HSD consumption has increased
by about 200 and 80 percent respectively during the ten
year period from 1983-84.
66. These products are from production in Refineries in
Mathura, Baroda and Bombay, as well from some imported
material.
It is not possible to relate Mathura Refinery
production to the consumption in Agra.

67. The sulphur content of petrol (motor spirit) and
kerosene are relatively low. However presently marketed
HSO has sulphur content of 0.7 to 0.8 per cent.
HSD
consumption in Agra district is approximately 70,000 MT
per annum including about 13000 MT by Railways. Most of
the diesel in Railways is used
outside the main Agra
city and Fort area for shunting in the
Meter Gauge
railway line.
HSD is largely used within Agra city in
generators and vehicles in the areas close to the Taj
Mahal.
Thus
the incrase in sulphur dioxide annual
average levels could be related to the increased use of
petroleum products, in particular HSD.
68. Information on categorywise vehicle population has
been
provided by the UP Government and is shown in
Annexure XVI.
During the 10 years period from 1983-84,
two wheelers increase from about 47,000 to 148,000, and
motor cars doubled from 4700 to
9890.
Many vehicles,
especially lorries, buses and luxury taxis,
may be
registered outside Agra, although passing into or through
Agra.
The Commissioner, Agra Division, has estimated
that about one lakh vehicles pass through Agra each day.
69.
in

Plans for promotion of tourism will require increase
infrastructure of hotels and vehicles, and larger

