employment.
These will lead to marked increase in the
demand. for oil and gas fuels, especially in the absence
of assured electrical power supply_
Concentration of
buildings and activities within a
certain area
s.urrounding heritage sites will tend to affect
air
quality.
To meet the standards in guidelines for
sensi ti ve areas, further concentration should be avoided70. With potential improvements in availability of
petroleum products, coal, charcoal, fire wood and biomass
materials would be replaced, and there would be further
rise in consumption of petroleum oil and gas materials.
High quality
standards for these are necessary to
maintain good air quality.

71.
Information on the quantities of coal and hard coke
supplied by coal companies during the last few years in
the Agra areas has been provided by the Ministry of Coal
(Annexure XVII). Coal consumption is about 500,000 MT
and has not shown any increase.
Of the total coal/coke,
the District Industries Centre has
reported that Agra
and Ferozabad Industries consume 129 MT and 100 MT per
day respectively. On the assumption that these units may
function for about 250 days in the year, consumption at
Agra and Ferozabad annually would be about 32,000 and
175,000 MT respectively. The balance of about 300,000
MT may be consumed by
brick kilns in villages,
restaurants, and households in urban and rural areas.
These do cause pollution of the atmosphere.
Industries
in Agra are situated north west, north and north east of
the Taj Mahal, several of them being located across the
river. These are the major sources of concern as they
are not far away, and much of the time winds blow from
their location towards Taj Mahal.
72.

Almost all foundries use coke, pig iron and scrap
as raw materials. They vary in size and capacity.
There are
essentially three sizes, determined by the
diameter of the cylindrical furnace. Most of them had
been following their traditional technologies without
any change for a long time.
Demand for foundry products
increased during 1975-81 from requirements of expansion
and industrialisation in West Asia.
Since then demand
has decreased. There is also competition in India from
industry in Punjab and South India. Energy consumption
in the form of coke seems high in most units based on
the amount of steel produced per tonne of coke. Coal is
processed in coke ovens by a process by which most of the
volatile materials in coal are removed by distillation.
~~

