In the production of foundry steel from pig iron, apart
from the high heat energy for melting, certain chemical
e lemerits present
inc 1 uding carbon sulphur and minor
metals in coke are incorporated into the foundry steel.
Thus coke has a crucial
role in steel making,
contributing to the ultimate chemical
composition of
steel and conferring desirable strength, corrosion
resistance and other properties.
In addition to 131
ferrous casting foundries there are also 34 pit furnaces
for ferro alloys which may depend on coke. Foundries in
addition depend on the good quality sand and on trained
and skilled labour.
Most of the
foundries produce
diesel pumps for lift irrigation and components
for
these and for auto industry. One large unit has adopted
electrical furnaces with diesel generated power to
produce aluminium precision components.
73. Other industries in Agra utilise coal in the main as
fuel energy source for heating and steam raising.
In
such cases,
firewood, rice husk, agro-wastes, waste
rubber or urban wastes
are also burnt as fuel, often
inefficiently. These also leave ash and solid residues.
Almost all units need some electrical power
in their
operations as well as in attached offices, and have their
own generators.
The composition of emissions would
depend on the materials burnt as fuel.
In all these
cases, coal can be substituted by petroleum, oil, or gas
fractions, and in most instances by electricity. Most
of
these uni ts
have
old
equipment.
Through
modernisation and better design, energy usage
can be
markedly reduced and air effluent emissions improved in
quality.
74.
It is learnt that the hotels, restaurant, food
articles preparation units and most households in urban
areas will be ready to utilise LPG in place of coal,
firewood or kerosene if it is available.
Brick kilns
however will continue to use coal, without chimneys or
air pollution control devices.
Brick making requires
top soil from agricultural lands and is not carried out
in the Agra city area or Sikandara.
75. It appears a large number of industry units have
installed air pollution control devices (APCD) in Agra
to meet the standards for emissions prescribed by CPCB
and the norms of UPPCB. NEERI has submitted on 5 April,
1994 a report on
'Inspection of Air Pollution Control
Devices in Taj Trapezium'.
In Agra only one unit, an
oil Extraction Plant using 3 TPD of rice husk as fuel
was inspected by a SlX member team constituted by the
Director, NEERI. Coke and coal using foundr~es or other
industrial un~ ts are the ones which re lease sulphur

