emission quantitles from Mathura Refinery in May-June
1995, and possible further reductions before September
1996, will be of some benefit in short term peaks in
Sikandra and the Ta] Mahal.
91.
These measures would help to reverse the trend in
the last five years of gradual increase in the long term
average levels of oxides of sulphur and nitrogen in Taj
Mahal and contribute to reducing frequency of occurrence
of high short term concentrations of pollutants.
The
objective would be to reach
the atmospheric quality
obtained in 1982-85.

INDUSTRIES IN AGRA
92.
Industries in Agra and Ferozabad have been asked to
instal APeD to reduce essentially SPM level in air
emissions.
UPPCB has the authori ty to moni tor their
performance to meet
standards outlined for different
industries by CPCB, noting
their capaci ties.
These
regulations should be fully enforced.
NEERI has
suggested suitable sites in Agra and Ferozabad could be
identified and developed as industrial estates wi th
facili ties, separated from residential areas.
I f such
sites are
developed,
natural gas supply in the
industrial estate would be possible with safety, and the
industrial units could be shifted.
93.
Natural gas by p.lpeline supply to households was
introduced in Baroda on a small scale in 1970, with a
nominal fixed charge per month, without meters. Bombay
Gas Co. had
distributed producer gas from coal by
pipelines in the ci ty to
households and for street
lighting but this has been suspended.
There are
proposals to examine the safety and feasibility of using
these old lines for distribution of Natural Gas. While
Natural Gas is supplied in India in North East and
through HBJ
pipeline is supplied to major industrial
units such as fertilisers, refineries, power plants, gas
fractionation uni ts, there does not seem to be any
instance of supply to industrial estates in which a large
number of small and medium units are located, presumably
due to a combination of factors such as safety, capital
costs, reliability of supplies, measures for metering,
sale and realisation of charges. There are also costs of
insurance for obligations in case of accidents. Consuming
units have to be trained on safety standards and
precautions. There is considerable turn over of labour
employed in small industry and these may pose some
limitations. There is need for a single authority in such
estates to coordinate all maintenance and repair work on
electrical supply, telecommunications, water, sewage,

