drains, roads and construction. Any industrial estate in
Agra with natural gas wl.ll have to be located at a
substantial distance from monuments to ensure full
safety.

94.

Natural gas can be supplied for such purposes by
to a local company or authority at a specified
terminal. The local bulk purchaser will then have tQ
create sui table distribution system incurring capital
outlay. Contracts on pricing and escalations will have to
be entered into. These will take some time to establish.
GAIL

95.
When industrial units are relocated, it would be
appropriate
to modernise technology equipment
and
buildings. Most of the units will need very substantial
financial assistance. The value of the present sites and
their future use have to be determined. It would not be
desirable to promote residential colonies and commercial
establishments in such vacated areas as they may inturn
add to the problems of water supply and atmospheric
quality by excessive use of energy. Major changes of this
nature would need a clear development planning strategy
and resources, and will also take several years for
implementation.

96.
There is urgent need for quicker measures which
could lead to better environment, especially in the Taj
Mahal. For this purpose I it is necessary to effect
overall
reduction in coal/coke consumption by
industries and others in Agra and in Taj Trapezium Zone
generally. The present level of consumption of 129 metric
tonne per day by industry can be substantially reduced by
new technology and by use of LPG and HSD of low sulphur.
Stricter standards for emissions may be evolved when such
technological and fuel changes are effected. Support for
development of modifications in design and operation and
demonstration should be provided. Some assistance to
industries for adoption of these may be considered after
careful examination of the costs and benefi ts to the
industry and to society. All those industries not
responding
for
action
for
feasible
changes
and
contributing disproportionately to atmospheric pollution
have to face action.

OTHERS:

Brick Kilns

97. There are 350 brick kilns in Agra District and they
consume 185,000 tonnes of coal in 5 months during
November to March at the rate of 1,200 tonnes of coal per
day. It is necessary to restrict this activity to areas
beyond 10 km. north and north-west of Agra city. Kilns
are not listed as industry and do not require approvals

