for operation. Some legal instrument and system has to be
deveoped to regulate activ1ties which may have effects on
the atmosphere 1n sensitive areas.
Commerclal establishments(Petha Industry)
98.
All these in Agra city have to be encouraged
desist from use of coal or fire wood or cowdung cake
fuel. Here again, wi th proposed freer availability
LPG,
certain compulsions can be brought about
eliminate solid fuels contributing to pollution.

to
as
of
to

Industries at Ferozabad
99.
Information on the extent of emissions in the
atmosphere and their contribution at different locations
in the direction of Agra is lacking. It is necessary to
establish three monitoring stations in Ferozabad itself,
and three more on the route to Agra.
Continuous
monitoring, as has been done in Farah, Keetham, Sikandra
and the Taj Mahal, is necessary to have a reliable
appreciation of the extent of pollution contribution from
Ferozabad industries in Agra sensitive areas. such steps
were not considered earlier, as it was assumed that due
to low percentage of winds from east to west during the
greater part of the year will lead to a low contribution.
Pending establishment of permanent monitoring stations,
It would be deslrable to carry out studies of three
months duratlon before and after the monsoon from
temporary facilities. Such a survey could be completed by
June, 1996 and would enable assessments to be made.
100. Ferozabad industry consumes 700 metric tonne of coal
per day. A large number of workers and residents are
exposed to high levels of pollution. Human health
considerations should prevail here, and efforts should be
made to enforce occupations heal th requirements. Such
considerations would neccessitate changes in design,
technology, fuel, and would lead to imp~ovement of
atmosphere. Some suggestions for improved technology and
energy conservatlon have been outlined earlier in this
Report. If studies are sponsored, better information will
be available by June
1996, as well as al ternati ve
technologies and designs.
I

101. In the meanwhile, suitable designs have to be
evolved for APeD for each type of furnace, especially in
very small industry. This is a challenging task.

