-IS-~-

Annexure XIX
1fR~ «'{~

I

NIRHAL SINGH
TEL: 381832

q.;;)~q tt«f snl'f(A' tl« ~~~
Goyernment of India

or

Ministry
Petroleum & Nfttural Gas
New Delhi - 110001

~~f:qq
JOINT SECRET AR Y

DO NO. P-3901B/l/95-CC

26TH l\PRIL,9S

Dear Shri Baksi,
Ki ndly refer to your DO letter no. Q-17012/1 /93-CPW dated
25th April, 1995.
The matter has been examined in consultation
with the oil industry and information is furnished as under:

According to the Plan approved by this Ministry for introduction of 0.25 sulphur containing IISD, same will be available in
the country by 2000 AD and not by 1997 as mentioned in your
letter as it will not be technically feasible to do- so by 1997.
The demand of the petroleum products is at peak during the
lIIonths of March to June and October to January.
During this year
due to unexpected shut down of Mathura Refinery and longer turn
around, in 118J pipeline the oil industry has to make di'p into its
inventory and therefore presently managing the demand and supply
in a hand to mouth situation. The demand of Jlsn has also shot up
during these months for the agriculture sector and the oil industry has geared fully to meet this demand by importing quantity of
IISD as per the existing specifications.
We have reassessed the situation and consider such a situation is likely to continue for a few months or till the Kandla
Bhatinda pipeline which would get commissioned by last quarter of
1995-96.
In view of this, our considered view is that it is not
desirable to change the product movement slate and product speci~
fications as it will adversely affect the supply resulting in
hardships to the entire consumers in the northern region.
I am
to mention here that already consumers in the northern region are
suffering due to the shortage of diesel.
In view of these facts and due to suggestions of Dr. Varadaraj an, we had discussed the matter in great detail with the oil
industry and this Miuistry proposes the following action plan for
Agra and Taj Trepizium.
i)

0.5 sulphur diesel from April,1996 as announced by the
MOS under the Ten Point Programme.

