baving
three seellons.
It wIll be possible
to
attend to anyone seetio.n without upsett~ng the power
plant operation. 1 hus It ~ouJd tt possible to au~nd
to the maintenance requlf~ment! of the electroslatic ptcCipilutoc, with n view to keep their efficbocy
ilr thc 1Jc'\ign level. lOCo have•. however, eonfirm~
that the power pl.wt is bewg deslgned for the usc ot
fuel oil ~md gas
and it would be pussible for it
to switch over to these fuels in case of any problem
with the u..e of coal.
3 45 All the waters that are likely to be cont.}minated will be separately collected and sent to the
Effluent Treatment Plant where adequate arrangement will be provided for physical, chemic~l and
b1ologi~'" treatment. The tr~ted efUu:ots will meet
the ~ifications laid down byt1he I~?lan . Standard
Institution and State statutory authonues In respect
of discharge of effiuent into inland surface waters.
The treated effluent is proposed to be discbarged into
Yamuna river at a point downstream of Brahmand
ghat, approximately 40 KM upstream of the Agra
Municipal Water \Vorks. through an open channel.
'An inspection road will be provided along the channel with points (or c:>Uection of samples. Sufficient
flow exists in the river for adequate dilution of the
treated effluents. However, IOC shall make necessary anangements fer proper dilution of the treated
effluent with fresh Yt a er, if required. IOC has obtained consent from the Chief Inspector of Factories
ana "Effluent· Board. U.P. and also from the U.P.
State Water Pollution (Prevention & Control) Board
for discharging the treated effluent into the Yamuna.
river.
3.4.6 IOC hac; confirmed that there is sufIcient
experti~e for design, construction' and operation
available in the country for treatment of the effluent
in order- to obtain desired level of DUrity of the finat
effluent
Similar facilities provided at the existing
IOC refineries arc workin.g sati')faclonly.
3.4.7 IOC ha~ studied the variouc; natural water
courses in the re~ion and it hafi been fi::m!y c"tabiishcd that at no time the effluent from the refinery
is likely to contaminate any of the water courses at
Bharatour.
3.4.8 Adequate facilities are being provided by
IOC for dispoS:lt of 3sh from the power plant in an
area of about 200 acres which would be sufficient
for disposal of ash from the power plant for about 15
year'). Since the ali\h will be dumped in the form of
slurrY. no adverse air pollution problems are anticipated
3 4 9 The aopr-oximate additional C04't on account
of providin~ the :lhove extra fncilities ha" been estimated at ahout Rc; R crores indudin2 the cost of
variou"-~udiec; undertaken in rec;pect of the Environmental Impact of MMhura Refinery as per details
given in Annexure VII.

"',\0

3.5 Studie.f on the Dispersal

of Pol/utallts from the

Re/irterv
3.5 J On the ba-;jq of meteorolo~ical data availab1e for Delhi and Al!T<l and U';;ing methods that are
generaUy employed, IMD made an exhaustive study

of the dispersal of pollutants from the refinery stack.
On the basis that emiSSIOn of sulphur diOXIde from
the refinery stacks would be limited to one tonne pee
hour, the report indicated that the increase in tho
long-term concentration of ~ulphur dloxldo at Agra
on account of the refinery would be one micrograTll
per cubIC metre. A copy of the IMD Report is
given at Annexuro VIII.
3.5.2 fecneco of Italy, u<;ing meteorological data
for the last tcn years for Delhi and on the basis of
dispersion model have al'\o predicted that the contribution on o;uJphur dioxide from the refinery to the
Agra region wQuld be in the region of 1.7 micrograms per cubic metre. A summary of their report is
given at Annexure IX NEERI have also made sample calculations and have arrived at nearly similar
results.
3.5.3 Although it was generally felt that thero
would not be much difference between the meteorological data of Mathura and Delhi, with a view to
improve upon the studies already made by IMD, at
the instance of the Committee, (MD set up three
first class meteorological obse'"Vatories for collecting
data at the refinery site, at Agra and at Bharatpur.
Using meteorological data colleated for more than one
year at the observatqrv at the refinery site, IMD
have indicated that the 10ng tum seasonal contribution of sulphur dioxide from the refinery would be of
the order Ct' 1.0 microgt~m per cubic metre at Agra
and 0.3 microgram per cubic metre at Bharatpur.
The short term maximum peak concentration (1
hour) is estimated to be about 65 micrograms per
cubic metre at Agra and Bharatpur. However, such
concentrations are likely to occur only during stahle
atm()l;pheric conditions. From an analysis of the
meteorologica~ data availllhle. JMD have indicated
that frequency for the atmosohcre to he ..;tablc
tow<!.rd~ Agra and Bharatpur i-; jn the region of 2 ()
to 40 per cent and 0 to 1 0 per cent respectively.
Only under such stable conditiono; the mR~~i"lum ~h~.,rt
tcrm concentration (I h()ur) of sulphur dioxide is
of the order of 65 micrograms pet cubic metre.
Detail~ are l!iven in Annexure X.
3.5.4 1M 0 have recogni~ed that one of the sh()rt·
comin~ of the dispersal studies in Reneral is the effect
oi the accuracy of studies due to use of different
They have.
empirical coefficients in the model.
therefore. in their report taken into account the effects
of assumine: different value~ for the empirical coeffi.
cients on the accuracy of estimate~ of concentration.
IMD have stated that although variation in empirical
coefficients will have conC\idcrable effect on the estimated concentration at di~tancC'~ clo~e to the refinery.
it would not have any aoprcciablc effect for e~timate9
of concentrations for di~tanccs hcyond 1() KM 'lOd
oarticularty for estimates at a di<:;tanee of 40 KM.
According ,to IMD at the most the--. error could be of
the order of 50 per cent for estim:ltes of concentration for ~uch long distances. IMD, therefore. concluded that the long term <;eali\on<ll contribution of
sulohur dio"id~ from the n::finf'rv to the A.gra region
can be as<;umcd with rca<;onable accuracy to be of
the order of one to two microgram" per cubic metre.

