CHAPrER S

RECOMMENDATIONS
Although primarily the Committee has been formed
to advise the project authoritIes on the measures to
be takC!l,Jor keeping the pollution effect to the absolute' minimum, conscious of the great responsibility
entrusted to the CommlUee and its deep concern for
the preservation of the prtceless monuments at Agra
and particularly the Taj Mahal, the CommIttee conside~ it of utmost importance that the followlflg
recommepdattons be con<;idered by the Government
for urgent and expedltlouS implementation in order
to reduce substantially Hie eXIsting pollution levels at
Agra and to forestall creation of any future sources
of pollution.
5.1 Efforts should t't} :uade immediately to minimise the existing poIlU.·......l from sources dose to the
monuments in the Agn~_ "'one. 'The U.P State Electricity Board has given indications that the old thermal
power station (nominal 10 MW capacity) near the
Agra Fort would b~ dismantled as soon as the grid
for power supply to Agra is ready and the other
power station (10 MW capacity) at ltmat-Ud-Daulah
which is in good condition will be shut down and
used only as a stand-by in emergyncie<;. Closing
down of these two power plants is expected to make
a ~ignifjcant redut:tion in th!: existing !evdc; of sulphur
dloxJde and particulate matter at Agra. It is recommended that early steps are taken to clo'\c down these
two powc:- plants.
5.2 Railways may be advised to replace the present coal-based locomotives with diesel-based locomotives at the marshalling yard at Agra. Since the
marshalling yard is very close to the Agra Fort. this
measure is expected to reduce the sulphur dioxide and
particui~ltc maner levels sIgnificantly.
5.3 Steps may be taken to ensure that no new
jndu<;try including c;mall indu'itries or other units
which can cause pollution are located north-west of
the Ta; Mahal.
5 4 Effortc; may be made to relocate the existing
small industries, particularly the foundries. in an
area seuth east of A~ra bevond the Taj Mahal so
that emissions from these industries will not be in
the direction of the monuments.
5.5 Similar considerations may apply to large
industries such as Fertilizer & Petrochemicals. Such
industries which arc hkely to cau~e environmental
pollution may not be located in the neighbourhood
of the refinery. The Committee further recommends
that no large indu'>lry In the Agr,. region and it~
ncighhourhood he c~t.lhli'\hcd without conducting
appropri.ltc detailed "tudics to a"sc'\s the environmental effect of such indu~trics on the monuments
L04...ation "hould he ,0 cho'c,~ a<:. to cxrhlde any
inCIt.,~ISC in environmental pottutlon to the area.

5.6 The Committee wishes to record its deep
concern regarding the eXlsttng level of pollution in
Agra. It recommends that an appropriate authority
be created which could mOnitor emissions by industries as well as the air quality at Agra on a continuous
baSIS. Thts authority should be ve<;ted WIth powers to
dtrect industries causmg pollutIOn to limit the
level of emission and speCify such measures as
are necessary to reduce the emIssion whenever the
pollutant level at the monument;: exceeds acceptablo.
lImits.
The Commiuee partiCUlarly desires that the
recommendations made in regard to reduction of existing pollution levels at Agra shout I be converted to a
,time-bound programme and shouJ ~ be implemented
with utmost speed.
5.1 The Committee recognise~ ,hat there is u!"~ent
need for continuous study and investigations to ensure
that the monuments at Agra are not exposed to further threats from the pollutants or from any cause.
Therefore, it recommends that such studies should
be periodically conducted with a view to determine
whether any deterioration has o<;curred and jf so,
scientificaUy analyse {he' cauc;e/s for the same to
enable taking suitable measure .. ror prevention of such
deterioration.
Since the Archaeological Survey of
India are in charge of precocrvation of the monuments,
it is logical that they should be entrusted with the
rc,\ponsibility for getting c;uch continuous studies
made. For this purpoc;e. ASI may have adequately
staffed celt which can carry out studies and additiona1·
Iy utilise the ~rvices of other organisations such as
National Environmental Engineering Research institute, India Meteorological Department. National
Physical Laboratory~ Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, National Aeronautical Laboratory etc., for
determining the status of the monuments and also. the
effects of ponutants thereon Adequate funds should
be made available to ASI for thec;e investigations.
5.8 The Committee also recommends that studies
should be undertaken by competent agencies to explore the possibility of protecting the monuments by
measures such as provision of a green belt around
Agra in the region between Mathura and Agra.
5.9 Even though assurances have been obtained
from IOC that adequate precautionc; would be taken
to contain the pollution on account of u~ing coat in
the power plant. the Committee is of the opinion
that till such time thi~ prohlcm i<; I\tudied in depth
and C\uitahlc technol(lgic~ have hcen found to he sati~*
factorily in usc cI~cwherc. the u,,-e of coal in the
refinery power plant should he deferred
5 lOIn order to e-nc;ure that lill t..(tf;,,,ions from
1hc , ... .illCf J :illd illcir JI"PC' ,'(III l{ltV'lrtfc;: A gra ~rc in
accordance With estimates made and as~uranccs given,

