ll\SELINE AIR QUALl [Y STUDY AT AGRA
FOURTH QUARTERLY REPORT
( WI NTER SEASON 1976-77 DATA)
1. Air quality data on the project work for the
last monsoon months (J une-October 19.76) was report~d car~ier in (he Third Quarterly Report.
This
report ~nsists of the winter season data for a period
starting from November 1976 to January 1977.
2. Air Sallll ,I;IIg Programme.-Thc sampling schedule was continued to be of the same order without
any changes in the original programme. Su1phur dioxide, oxiJcs of nitrogen, suspended particulate matter
is being sampled on every f9urth day at each of the
monitoring sites. Only monitoring site at Taj Mahal
being surveyed on every alternate days. Sulphation
rate mt:asurements are also oarried out at all the five
locations, namely, the Taj, Red Fort, Itmat-ud-Daulah,
Sikandra and Nagar Mahapallka, Other two sites
have been added for sulphation measurements one of
which i'; at Fatehpur Sikri Guest House, and the other
at Circuit House in Agra.
3, Wind data ,regarding speed and direction are re-:corded at the Circuit House premises from the Officers
Ho~tel Buildin~ Roof.
4. OIUl'n'lltiolls.-Tablc 1 summarises the variations in sulphur dioxide levels during 24 hours for
three dillerent months. There is a remarkable rise in
levels a~) compared to previou'\ observations for summer and rainy season. particularly at the monitoring
sites at Taj Mahal. Agra -Fort ;lIld Itmat-ud-Daulah.
Maximum trend was observed during December. the
levels of sulphur dioxide being 40 to 50 /ug/m:>. on 24
hours <1\ crage,
Table 2 give further details with respect to aU the
pollution parameters under study. The max.imum 2
hourly values of sulphur dioxide are recorded as high
as 100 :0 200 lug/m:>. but once in a month duri_~g
nights,
Nitrogen dioxide also shows a significant rise from the
summer and rainy season observations. Eight hourly
maximum values recorded for nitrogen dioxide are
around 60-90/ug/m:>' or even more at all the stations
ex.cept S ikandra, The higher levels are recorded during
nights,
S~spended particula.te mattcr leve1s are al~o quite high
durin~ a II three months of winter ran~ing between 300
to 400 /ug/m:t at all sites including Sikandra which is

away from the city, Winter values are comparable
wilh those observed during summer.
SuIphation rate measurements are also proportionately on increase as per the expectations (Table 2).
5. Temperature.-The temperature recorded at the
Circuit How;e site .lre given below. The values have
been computed from the recording charts.
---- ---- - ------ - ------- ----Averagt"' CO Maximum Minimum

!\Ionth

November

9

December

5

January
---

--

.
------

6. Wind pattern.-From the conected data at the
Circuit House, the wind pattern for the region
shown as 'below:

js

Directions %
Month
N
November.
Dcc('mLcr •

January

.' 5

NF. E. SE

S

SW W NWCalm

J

,0'4 0

4'0

!l'g 2'3

,I(.

'2

10

0'74'7

7

----

2

--

7'S 9'268'8
J2

13

<13

-------

Calm cQnditlonll are prevaknt during willtn monti.s.
prcvailiJlg wind direction wall Jl()rlh·wc~t and wcst,

11.t'

During monsoon period the calm conditions were in
the range of 40 to 60 per cept and the prevailing
direction of the wind wa~ southwest and west.
7. Rem,arks.-The general trend of pollution parameters is on the increase with respect to all parameters
under study. This trend is ~ignificantly differem irorn
that observed in summer and rainy season.
Winter data is available for last three years from
1974 to ] 976 and will be studied and compiled in the
final report.
8. Follow-up-programme,-The last phase of the
survey is in progress. The field survey will conclude
on March 31, 1977. This report will follow a final
report on the survey project by June end 1977.

30

