Products
FO (Reg)

Qty in '000
tonne~Year

84

Fertilizer Feed

640

Bitumen

300

Sulphur

6

3.4 It is also proposed to build a township of
approximately 800 houses for the refinery. The
township will be provided with faciHties such as
schools, medical treatment, shops and recreation
facilities.
3.5 Employment Potellliai.-The total requirement
of personnel for the refinery· is estimated at 1100.
Apart from the direct employment opportunities
commissioning of the refinery will provide indirect
employment opportunities to small-scale and other
industries in the area in the form of maintenance
jobs, provision of stores etc.
4. Effluellts from the Refinery and the,ir Treatment
4.1 Effluents from the refinery can be divided into
two categories, viz. those to· be discharged to the surface and those discharged to the atmosphere.
Effluents that will be discharged to the surface will be
mainly treated waste water from tbe refinery and coal
ash from the refinery thermal power plant. Effluents
that will be discharged to the atmosphere will be due
to evaporation of petroleum products during storage,
catalyst particles, flue gases from the furnaces and
particulate matter from the power plant stack.
4.2 i:"f]lu(,lli.f to 1'l" tli.rclwrgl·d to tire Sur/iKe
4.2.1 The estimated quantity of treated waste
water that will be discharged from the refinery is of
the order of 3 million gallons per day. The refinery
will have an elaborate system for collection of all
waste water tha~ needs treatment before discharge
which include:
(i) Oily Storm water from tank farm;
Oi) Oily & Chemical waste water;
(iii) Contaminated rain water;
(iv,) Cooling tower blow down;
(v) Sanitary sewage; and
(vi) Spent caustic.
In other words, during normal conditions any
water that is likely to be contaminated is collected
for trc:ltmq1t hcfore its discharge.
4.2.2 The facilities for the treatment of these have
been given in the -attached Block Diagram No. 1217-

65-SKB-045-A.
4.2.3 The usual contaminants arc oil. phenol and
sulphides. The facilities provided will enc;ure that
the contamin:mts will be reduced to the limits specified hv the current Indian Standard Specifications for
industrial effiucnts to be discharged into inland river
water<;. Adequate know-how trlnd
manufacturing
capabilities exist within the country for providing
these treatment facilities.

4.2.4 The ash from the thermal power plant .i
proposed to be dumped into a speCific area admeasur·
ing approximateJY 200 acres, which will be used 33
a burrow pit for construction earth requirements.
(Please refer to Drawing No.
180O-C-7302)
The area is considered to be adequate for dumping
ash for ten to fifteen years. The ash will be transported in the form of slurry. Adequate bunds will
be provided so that the water, after separation will
have sUfbcient timS! to settle before it is discharged
into the n3tural drainage of the area. Reuse of ~
water is also being examined. In any case, the wate
that will be discharged will conform to the relevatJ
Indian Standard Specifications. Since the ash
be wet, local dust nuisance will be prevented.
4.2.5 The treated w~(e water will be discharged
into the Yamuna river at a suitable point downstream
of Brahmandghat via an open channel from the ren.
nery to the discharge point. (Please refer to drawin&
No. 1800-C-73022). An inspection road will
also be provided along the channel. Adequate
arrangement for proper mixing of the treated wasta
water with the river water will be provided at the
point of discharge. It has been ascertained that the
extent of dilution of the waste water even When there
is minimum How of the river is more than 1 : 1() and
t~e river water will ~e. suitable for human cons amptlOn after usual mUnIcipal treatment. As per information provided by the State Government officials,
there is no habitation for about 15 to 20 KMs from
the point of discharge. This point is about 40 KM~
from the Agra water supply works.
4.2.6 As a normal routine measure considerable
attention is given to the collection, treatment and
discharge of the emuent in n refinerv. (,hcck~ and
balunces arc provided to ensure thai only water of
acceptable 4uality is discharged into the channel.
Samples from the channel as well as from the rivet
will also b:: periodically coUeetcd and checked.

wm

4.3 EOillellls

10

be Discharged to the Atmosphere

4.3.1 The catalyst fines which is an inert material
is discharged from (he stack of the Catalytic Cracking Unit. The approximate quantity of discharge is
one tonne per day. The size of the particles is of the
order of 50 microns or less. No adverse effect is
caused by this discharge.
4.3.2 Another particulate matter that will he discharged to the atmosphere will be fro III the thermal
power plant stack. llere also facilities will be provided sri that the p:u tides that will he disch;lfgcd to
the atmosphere will· be of less than 50 microns.
4.3.3 Evaporation losses are minimum since most
of the products which arc volatile arc Stored in tanb
with floating roofs for reasons of safety as well as to
reduce product losses.
4.3.4 The main source of contamination in the
effiuents to be discharged to the atmosphere is sulphur
dioxide contained in the flue gases from the fttwances
and FCC stacks. The sulphur dioxide in the flue
gases come [rom sulphu~ contained in the fuels. With

