THE DISPERSAL OF POLLUTANTS FROM A REFINERY STACK

by
PK Daa, RK Dutta

& BM Cbhabra

Meteorological Office, Lodi Road, New Delbi-J

1.

INTRODUCTION

It has been proposed to establish a refinery near Mnthura
during tbe late Fifth Plan or early Sixth Plan. Yatbura is about
40 Km from Agra, yhere one of tbe major tourist attraction in India The Taj Matia} - is located. The designers of the refinery are, 6S
a consequence: concerned about whether the quantum of sulphur dioxide released from the refinery stacks would damage tbe Taj Wahal.
Sulphur dioxide ia a toxic gas which. in combination with water
vapour in the atmosphere. produces sulphuric acid. Tbe long term
effect of this on marblo, and other monument., would be to corrode
them. To have an idea of the.possible quantum of pollutants and
their effect on Taj ).(ahal some preliminary computations have hefln
made. This is a preliminary report and here an attempt has been
made to present computwti~ns of sulphur dioxide concentrations at
di f rerellt dis tRuces dowlutircnm from a-refiuery atack under different meteoroJogical conditlotl9. We have assumed that sulphur
dioxide emanati~g from the stack spreads out in the form of a
Gaussinn plume. Earlier work of Sutton (195J) and Pssquill(1962)
fOXlnS the basi s of this study.
There are some uncertainties in our computations because of
a numoer of variables used on which very Ii ttle field data are
available.
The main uncertaintIes are on account of (a) empiric-al
values of diffusion co-efficients, (b) the mechanics of plume rise,
(c) empirical wind profiles in lhe lowest IOn m above the ground.
Here an attempt bas also been mode to estima~e the order of errors
in the computatiolls of sulphur dioxide concpntratioos due to these
cnUH es.

2.

SY}.illOLS

·The follow! ng symbols not defined in the text have been
used in this paper.

x

Short period (1 hour) ground conc-entrations
in
/," 3 )

(A~

Emis sion ra tc (

jJ-8 /sec

)

Potential temperature (Ok) and its
verti cal grad~ ell t (Ok/m);

43

