56
In figures 2 and J we have shown the short term concentration with and without the use of a power law.
The
values obtained with the power law are lower.
In Appendix J we have also presented values of the
long term concentration with the help of a power law and
wi thout po\ver law for a very stable atmoaphere to simulate th.
worat meteorolollcAl oondition..
Th • • ,~i.u. peak oonoentration i. 28.1~ 11m) at a di.tance of 2 k. from a .taok bei,bt
of ~O m. This occurs with a power law for northwesterly wind.
in January_ Without a power law the corre8ponding value i. 3rJ~
If the stack

h~jght

is raised to 80 _, the maximwu peak

15 rerluced to 10.3flg/m

3

concentr~tion

f or nor th-vesterly winds in January.

Tbe maxlmum concentration at 8 distance 40 km downstream
is 1.}.,<.4 g/m 3. 'lor northwesterly winds in January without a power
laue
If we use a power law however, the maximum concentration
40 km dO\fnwind is reduced to 0.6 Alg/.) lor a stack height ot
40 m.
For bigher s tack (SO m) this i8 reduced to 0.% A ,/m 3 .
b

AGRA WINDS

The study is mainly based on the wind data 01 Delhi
which is 140 km away from the site of the refinery",
Ideally
wind data of Yathura should be used for the purpose of these
compu~ations.
But, 8S sucb data were not. available, the Delhi
data ~ere used. A lew comparative checks were made between
Dt'lhi and Agra and wind data.
Agra i8 nearer to Wathura than
Delhi. TheBe checks suggest that-a large difference in the
final results would not be caused by the uaa of Delhi winde.
It must be emphasized, however, that the quality of
the data for Agra was not 8S reliable a8 that of Del~i and the
records were available for only one year.
I~ order to beco ••
more confident about the accuraoy of our aulphur-dioxide •• timates, an observatory haa been established at the site of Mathura Refinery and another . i l l be 8et up at Agra near the raj Wah.

c.

lrlADRAS WI NO DA TA

As we had mentioned earlier, computations were made
with the wind data of Madras.
It Was lelt that these estimates of ooncentration could be checked, if necessary,
against field observations.
Thi. would provide a check on
the reI iabili ty of 0 ur model.

