(iii) Some er~lcks on

suuctural modification caused to lapideous material as
a reSUlt 01. agmg is alSo a help in the .study of the
causes of allerauon and tHclr mecharusm. The
measurement ot the absorption ot water is earned out
to nave, an Ifl{.,hcauon ot Ule capacHy of the ~tone to
absorb water.
t fie Kepon glves details on the techniques and meU10US U;),xl LOr carryHlg OUt Wese slUllles.
1 he resUlts
OOt..Ui1('o ar~ given In labuwr tonllS and also in graphIcaL lOrm5. l~ununary ot loe finumgs IS gIven 1U paras
2.j.l, 2.).2 and 2.5.3).
2.3.3 SuperficiaL strata of the Slone were subjected
to the !ouowmg tests tor mveslIgaung the presence
of SOlUble saits and mechamsm of therr aeuon:

the slabs along the
greyish veins, from where a visible algae
growth is penetnlling inside.
For Sandstone
(i) A heavy exfoliation of stone along
the
sedimentation planes~
(ii) In some places a white efflorescence is
present on the detaching layers.
(iii) 1n some places large and black entrusted
layers cover the surfaces.
(iv) III some places insects and weeds
arc
present.
2.2.3 M(}cie of collectioll of sampl£'s.-Samplc~
were collected to study in more details the following
forms ot ulterations:Enrlh dust (pl ('sent on marble)
Black spots (prescnt on marble)
Black spots (present on sand stone)
White eHtorcsccncc (present on sand stone)
Samples were taken using sterile scalpel (spots and
efflorescence) and with n stcrile brush (dust).
The
maleri;tI collectcd from every type of alteration from
each monument was put in a sterile tube, closed with
a rubher stopper wr~lppcd ill a sheet of ~lIuminium
and kept in a rdri!!nalof (ahout 4"C) uplo the time
they wen: (ran"portcd to Rome in portable refrigerated
cases. The collection of samples was done during
the period from ()Ih 10. 16th Jan, J976. Some pieces ot
marhle and sand slonc detached from the thrce monuments duting the pH.'vio"" m:linlcnance wo(k WCIC
!!iVl'n hy lhc An:hacolorical Survey of India to he ;lllalysed and compared with the corresponding quarry
stones.
2.3 l'clrogrtll'hic. C/u'III':("al alld Physical A Ilalyses
carried Ollt 011 the ."(flll/Jles
To establish thc actual stale of conservation of
monuments two typcs of studies \\lere made on the
sampics collected. One was of chemical aud physical
nature aud the other of hiolo!!ic;tI. ('haplcr J of the
report di"ctls'\l''\ the sludiL's ell tinl out with Pctwfraph ie, (. 'h\..'mical am) Physical Analyses-following
methods were used:
2.3.1 Petrographic ,,\'[Ild'·.--This was J~)J}e to determine the 1cthc types and thcir characteristics. Phenomena of aging and of allcr:lliuns in the building
m:ltcria\" llqWIll' not only 0/1 extern;,l' Ct ,nditions but
on their Illiller:liogical l'Oillpll .... itioll and il~lcfl\al slructu~'c. For this rcason micro'icopic and lllineralogical
nllcroscopic oh"l'rvation'\ were C;1/ ricd out on thin sections of the s:Hnpll'''. Maclo"copie observations were
not possibtc for many o[ the. monument samples because ()f their sllIall sizl'''. "hl' fCPOIl discusses the
observations made and ;t1so gives SOnie photographs
showing texture of the stones. (Summary of the findings is given in paras 2.5.1, 2.5.2 & 2.5.3).

(,a) A-ray dH1ra~LJoll:

1,l1s to\.:llllH.iue helped

in tunUSltUlg acJJtllonal lIlwrmatlOn on
mineral consUl UClllS.
(b) Chemical
analyses--qualitative
and
quantItative,
(c) Morphological examination by electronic
scannmg JlUC10S";0PC, mctallugruptuc and
nu ncr.uoglc microscopes.
The Report discusses Jf1 detail (he various observations
made and also oescrihes the lechllltJuCS and methods
employed 'for the analyses. (Sulluu:lry of the findings
is given in paras 2.5.1,2.5.2 & 2.5.3).
2.4 il;%gicaf AlJtsiy,\'C's: (Chapter 4 o{ the Report)
2.4, J fhe biological research was guided by the
following objectives:
(it J A dif eel survey of (h~ hiologieal profile of
each monulllent.

(b) The study of specific biological deteriorations.
(c) An indirect evaluation of lhe state of conservation by determination of the microbic charge of all tYiKS Ol aiterations.
The ohjective (a) \Va~ carried out in !'itUl with the
verification of generic alteratiolJ" ~l1d thc ptesellcc or
ah"cnce of :lltcrations of hiological 01 igin.
The objective (b), which 'was c:trrit:d out with laboratory tests, includes -the survey of specific phenomena
of bio-deterioration, their recognition, their morphological classification and (he characterisation of the
dominant biological agent.
For thl' third ohjn.:livc {c) u. . illg ',pcciJic liquid and
solid cultures, isolation was cfkcled in the laboratory
of those microhic groups which ;11 e considered on
account of their mctabolic ch~1I 'ICtcri\lics, to playa
part in thc alteration of monuments. The report gives
det:tils of each of the tesls :tnd disclI"scs the fimiJngs.
(Summary of the Jilldings is given under para 2.5.4).

2.5 Findings of the Izemical, J>llysicai & Biological
allalyses: (Chapter 5 of the Report)
25.1 111c different ,types of analyses carried out
on the samples from monuments and quarries showed cOf1<;idcrablc agreement. Materials used in these
monumente; are same and state of conservation is
comparable.
From tlle quantitative ditkrence of
soluble salts in the marble samples it can be presumed that there is slight1y more attack at Agra Fort

2.3.2 Porosil1lclric C/wraclcrislic.-A knowledge of
the Porosimetrical characteristics of the stonc material,
i.e. the volume of the Pores and their di<:;rribution in
relation to thc SL'l'lioll. ;<; important -for c1a<:;sifying the
stone according to its internal structure, The mechanical properties and the durability of the material depend upon the pore structure. A knowledge of the
81

