the result of theoretical calculations which, although
carried out with due care, have necessarily large
margins of uncertainty connected to the schematizalion taken for the meteorological parameters.
As ulrendy referred in our comment<; on p:lge 15 of
our First and Sccond Rcp0l't it should be notcd that
in their calculations SO. is considered chemicully
and physicaUy inert. This means that physical
or
chemical removal processes of S02 are not taken
into consideration. This assumption does not affect
very much the short; term coocentrations whilp
overestimates the long te~m concentrations.
The model assumes a stationary meteorological
condition, that is speed and direction of wind and
atmospheric stability are considered constant during
the transport of pollutants.

that condensation phenomena on the stones occur IS
rathcr small.
This sit!lation ill_cans that thc attack of atmospheric SO I on thc stones is illore dillicuLt.
On the other hand, it shoutd be considered that
the tlclcriorutKm phcuulIlclla UI C not linear but exponential.
This means that the more a stone is altered, the
more it will be sensitive to the action of any altera路
lion agent.
From this point of view, the bad conservation of
standstone makes this stone more sensitive to the
action of any degradation agent including atmospheric pollution.
Another consideration concerns the accumulation
phenomena consisting in the fact that eventual chcmicaL attacks on a stclllc, even if low in absolute
\;dues, induce an irreversible modification on the
~I()ne itsclf which is ~ldded to the others, even
if
slight, which preceded it and which will follow:
However, it is evident that, if such modifications
ife slight in absolute values. they become secondary
~mpared to those more important induced by other
dteration agents.
Excluding some fragments of stone taken from
IUbstitutions carried out during maintenance work,
311 the other marple and sandstone samples
were
taken from the surface of the various deteriorated
wiles of the three monuments.
As f~lr 'IS the marble is concerned, on the whole
Ull' alterations arc limited to only a few zones.
On the contrary, the alterations of the sandstone
ire present nearly everywhere.
Therefore, in conclusion, the marble results as being well conserved in all three monuments and its
Itate of aging can be considered initial while the
undstone is generally in a bad condition.
Since the concentration levels of pollutants taken
nto consideration are very low, it can be taken for
lranted that the atmospheric pollution actually prelent in the Agra zone docs not constitute a prevailing
cause of alteration such as to notably increase the
aatural aging of the stone.
The levels of SO:! concentrations in the Agra Zone
cue to the refiner:' (from J.5 to 2 micrograms/m 3 as
an annual average) form an objective increase of
present levels; however the concentration levels at
Agra Zone, increasing from 6 micrograms/m:l to
a.5-8 micrograms/m 3 as an annual average will re路
main as very low absolute values路.
. For this. reas~n, although keeping in nU.!ld the preCIOUS conSIderations on the state of conservation 3 of
the stones and on the accumutation effect, it can be
considered that the foreseen pollution levels will not
W)rm one of the main cau~es of deterioration of the
monuments. It is necessarv to remember that the
annual increase of SO. of ~1.5-2 micrograms/m1 is

LX Glossary 0/ Biological Terms
Appendix-I gives Glossary of Principal Biological
terms uscd.

2.9 Deterioration

0/

Stolle

MOlllt11lelllS

In Appendix-II. M/s. Tecneco have described
in detail the various aspects of the deteriuration
of
stone monuments and the factors, causing the
deterioration. such as chemical, physical, mechanical
and biological and also the effects o[ atmospheric pollution based on available published literature.
2.1 (I

/lihliograp/~.\'

I

Chapter 10 of the Report gives the Bihliography
\,,路hich is n;produced below.
BIBLlOGRAPHy-Chapter 3
1. R. Gerard, "Detennination de la resistance au gel des materiau:"t de construction
par la porometrie au mercure", C.S.T.e.,
F. . cvue fl. 1, Janvicr-fevrier 1969, BruxcUc5,
( Belgriq ue).
2. Proceedings of the International Symposium-Pore structure and Properties of
~1atcrials,
September
1973,
Pmgue,
(CzechoslovaKia) .
3. L. f\.1erchesini, G. Biscontin, S. Frascati,
Controle de la consolidatit..)fl des marmbrcs
sacearoidaux". The treatment of stone,
published by Centro Cqn"efvazione Sculture
all 'Aperto, 1972, Bologna. (Italy).
4. D. B. Honeyborne, P. B. Harris, "The
structures of porous building stone and its
retation to weathering behaviour"', Proceedings of the tenth Symposium of the Colston
research Society. Unh'crsity of Bristol,
March 1958, Butterworths Scientific Publications, London, (U.K.).
5. P. Rossi-Doria, M. Tabasso. "Prove di
invecehiamento artificiale su pietre, marmi

I) Note:

It was already said in chap. 6, the value
6
micrograms/m 3
really represent the aVErage during the 6
months 'Of measurement. from 12th July. 1976. But we can sonsider that the annual a\'erage concentration
lIflould
not
be higher than
6 micrograms/m3 because during the other 6 months, in \\'hich the measurements were not made, there are three months affected by monsoons.

85

