ANNEXURE XU
DHARATPUR BIRD SANCTUARY CORRESPONDENCE E.XCHANGE

Copy OF:

COpy OF:

No. MRG/6/6
12TH JUNE '77 TO

LE1:TERS PROM MEMBER-SECRETARY

REPLY

18TH APRIL '77 AND
MESSRS NATURE CONSERVANCY COUNCIL, THEROYAL SOCIETY FOR PROTECTION OF BIRDS AND
THE WILD FOWL TRUST. ALL Of? U.K.

DATED

RECEIVED

SOCIETY FOR THE
20TH MAY. 1977.

FROM
MESSRS
THE
ROYAL
PROTECTION OF BIRDS DAT£.D

I am replying to your lettcr of 18th April sceking
information about the effects of rcfinerics on birds.
It is difticult to comment with absolute confidence
without more detailed information but it appears
likely that the effect of the refinery on th..: birds will
not be significant.
As the refincry is Jocated some 30 krn~. from the

As you are perhaps aware, construction work on
a large oil refinery of a capacity of processing six
million metric tons of crude per annum has commenced at a plaec ncar Mathura. which is situated
at about 150 KM South East of New Dc/hi. The
rcfinery win havc thc normal process units, storage
tanks. dc.patch facilities and would also include a
power Dlant. It is expectcd to he commissioned by
early 1980.
As a measure of limiting elntSSlon of pollutants
from the refinery, a decision ha~ been taken ·to use
only low sulphur fucls so that thc total emission of
sulphur dioxide from the refinery would not be more
th;1n one tonne per hOllr. This was primarily from
p<'linf of view of conservation of monuments such
as the Trti M:llwl and (hc Agra Fort.
Subsequent to the decision to locate the refinery
eH Mathur" some :ll1prehen"jon<; havc been rai<;cd
ahout ;1" po""ihk advl'.-"l' l'Ifccl, (Hl the Bird S:1nctu:u \' silu:ltcd :11 Hh:1ratpm, :",pf("~imatcly 30 KM
"olllh we,t of Ihl: ,dillCfY. Thj, Sanctuary used to
he Ihe famcd d\J~k shooting preserve of the rulers
of the fOffner Stale of Bha~atPllr. It consists of a
n:ltuntl dcprc""ion. spare"clv covered with medium
si7.:cd tree .. and ~;hPtn"
It js one of the bcst brecdim! nfac~ of wafer hillls. Tht'v assemnie in lar(~c
rml110crs during the month ()f July and August and
hrCPding takc" - nlace until Octoher. when the younJ!
hirds Clrc usuallv hig enoll(!h to ltv away. Promincnt
amollJ' rhese birds ;t.·c the ODcn' bilt. painted ~tork.
spoon hill and grey hcron. egrets, darter or snakcbip' ~lI1d while ihi".
\Ve understand that you ha\'e conc;iderahle data
on ~he ('Ike/" of nl:tnt~ "lIcn ;1<; the refinerv nn hird".
We wordd, therefore. like to h:lvC your guid:lnce nn
th~ stcus to be takt'll fo al;,ess 'the effect of the
M:lthura Refinery on hird .. and the measures to be
taken tn enslin' that then:- would he no adverse
t'ffect. \Ve shall he cratcflJI fnr ,your ::tdvice on the
1in(' of :lction that we could take f~r this purpose.
Shmrld vou d('"irc for further derails we can furni~h th(' same ar"'r h('aring from vou.
Thanking you in ;l\1ticip:\tioll of an early rcply.

sanctuary we
effects arjsin~
effluents into
impact would
and these are

assume that there is no likelihood of
from disturbance or from disposal of
water courses and the only potential
arise from sulphur dioxide emissions
not known to effect birds. However,
some plants are susceptjbl~ and there could, as a
result, he a change in vegetation with consequent
effects on the birds' food suppJy and habitat. This
secnl" unlikely hut if you wish to pursue it further,
J wl)uld H.'commcnd that you contact Dr. Humphery
Upwcn of thc Department of Chemistry at the
l 'niversity of Reading, Berkshire, England. I ima~ine that he would need to know the O1:1in plant
~{x:cics involvcd before being able to comment.
If after furfher consu1t:ltion you feel that it is
po~<;ihlc that there would b6 an elIcct from the refinerv. it would be desirable to set u9 a biological
moni-toring programme so that once it is in operation
nny serious changes c:m be identified, correctly attri-

buted to their cause and-appropriate remedial actioll
laken. This might involve undertaking' seasonal
counts of selected bird species and relating their
natural fluctuations on their ovcrall population levels,
hut it is more likely that the programme would be
ba!\cd on monitoring changes in the numhers and
distrihution of lowcr organisms or plants within the
sanctuary arca.
I am $orry that our advice cannot he more pre-

cisco hut this js impossible without more detaiJed information; I hope that it will be of some help.
COpy OF:
LETTER RECEIVED FROM MESSRS NATURE CONSERVANCY COUNCIL DATED 24TH JUNE. 1977

I (,lDologisc for the delav in rcplying to vour Ictter
of I Rth April but the prohlcm of the possible dfccls

90

