'POllution from the proposed Mathura Oil Refinery

attention. The effiuent quality would
a problem if its release contaminated
\... aters fceding the Bhilratpur SanctuaryIt is certain {hal accidl'llts wili oc,-=ur
through human error 01 plant failure and
any
consequential potlution of water
courses will undoubtedlY cause concern .
LJ~

the Bharatpur Ulnl Sanctuary has necessitated
sultation wHh advi"~t s hoth within and outside
organisation.
I he pll1hlclll is best considen:ti
lIer ~everal 11calilllgs as [ol~ows:
f)hur

• is pleasing to learn of the decision to limit emis·
~ ot pollutants hom the projected
refinery by
.g only low sulphur fuels to conserve the Taj
,al and the Agra Fort. \Vith reference to the
eratpur Sanctuary and nature conservation inteilL general som<.: plants, notably lichens, arc very
teptible to injurious cflccts of gaseous sulphur.
"'ever, a case can bc made out tor sulphur as a
tfit to watcr hirds.
Sulphur dioxide emissions
an acidic sulphur contribution to the environt1 but when neutml izcd act as tl significant fertit. This tends to increase the protein content of
etic and emergent plants as well as increasing
lton and bottom invertebrate
levels in what
#wise might he relatively infertile waters. froJ& this process is 1101 uvcnfonc. und so Ic..-:td tu
!'enrichment, the presellce or SOllie
:tdditional
lur would not seem to he deleterious to (he
ralpur Sanctuary. The relationship between
r-fowl density and sulphur ahudanee is iIIustraby rt'fell'lH.'l' 10 till' ~iltt:llj(111 nl lhe Canadi~1t1
d of Unlarie. .1 n gcltl'l al only a sparse water
popul;:ltion is supported hut there arc two arC~IS
( Shiclc.!, downwind from Iltt' smdfl'rs at SudhuI"Y
WOIwa, that SlIPPOI t populations of dul.1<. that
comparahle to high hfl'eding duck densities clseA similar situa1ion of henefit to water birds
at Lake Myvatll in Iceland which has sulphur
\prings and geysers.

Colltrols
I need hardly say that adherence of Lhe strictest
code of conduct, control and supervision in all activities aimed at keeping gaseous emission, only waste
and general pollution down to a minimum 'will be
the best safeguards.
SUlIlmar y

From the evidence available to me it is thought

unlikely that the Bharatpur Sanctuary will be at fisk
from the proposed refinery. '1 he possible addition
of sulphur may in fact be advantageuus to the birds.
The main danger is ~ikCly to arise from accident and
in particular trom pollution of the water sources 01
thc Sanctuary.

I am sending under separate cover three booklets
which may be of general interest to you. They arc
\Pollution Research and the Research Councils
(1977). Comhustion-Gener:11 Pollution (1976) find

Erkel" of AidlOrIlC Sulphlll COll1poullds 011 I'orests
and rreshw3ter (1916).

If there is :lIly further help 01" info! Illation you
may Ilced please do nol hcsilalc to cont:!ct mc.

I am copying this letter and enclosures to the
Scicntific Counsellor to thc Indian High Commission, London, and the Jetter to the Lo~don oflice
of Illternation~rt Tanker Owners Pollution Federation
Ltd. \\'!10 !13VC both beer} in tOUC!l v-lth us on the
matter.

Polilitallis

41cr pollutants will occur either as gaseous emisor nrc water horne. Therc will hc a suhstanrmission of hytlro-earholls, !lhcnols and other
I1S but although their pollution effect should not
a problcm it is dcpentlent on local factors at
"t unknown to me. These possihle influential
mknown f~lctors will include:(a) The physic~ll gcography of the arca including 1he effect of shadow of. hills and
prevailing wind. From this typ<..1 of information it should be possiblc to construct isobars of expected pollution fallout &\t ground level.
(h)
'nfonnalint1 nil .prclC(,S~;f1~. ,.m"" (IS .hC'
fields uf. UI igill 01 oil und therefore the
type of crude being processed and its
wax content, together with the height
of the stack releasing the gaseous emission, wou~d be furthcr relevant factors
in the matter.
(c) If the process was water-cooled rather
than air-cooled the source of water obtained for the process, and in particular
its rc1e.ase. would again be matters for

COpy OF:
FROl\f MESSRS TilE
\Vu.o FOWL
301'11 JUNE '77
Thank you for your Jetter of 13th June seeking
ndvice regarding the likely effect of emission of sulphur dioxide from the Matllura Refinery on the Bird
Sanctuary at Bharatpur.

REPLY RECEIVED
TRUST IH.

We havc already been consulted hy our Nature
Conservancy Council on thi~ question and we have
rac;snl 1111 Ih(' 1 d('Vfll1t clatn we' hnv,·
IIH·II1. I huvc
dl\.'d. l'J tlwt the Nee have
reccnlly despatched
their reply to you and therefore I will not seck to
duplicate it.

'0

l\1ay I say how impressed we are with the environmental concern shown by your Corporation. If you
feci there are any further points on which We can
assist. when you have examin~d the Nee reply, do
not hesitate to Jet us know.

91

