COpy Of tE r'fER No. MRGj6/6 OT. 12TH
I'ROM MEMIJER-SECRETARY TO

DR.

SErT. '17
SALIM Au,

actual concentmtion of sulphur dioxiue is much high..
cr as illustrated in the tahle given below:

PIU,SI\)ENT, BOM8AY NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY,
BOMBAY

Permit me to draw your kind attention to the discussion with Dr. S. Varadarajan, Chairman of the
Expert Committee on Environmental Impact of
Mathuaa Refinery, during your visit to Delhi on 11th
August. During this discussions you had kindly
agreed to give us det'lils of some of the bird sanctuuries abroaJ and the organisations responsible for
their maintenance so that we could get in tQuch
with them and find out about the precautions being
taken lor preservation of the sanctuaries. We had
also requested you to give us an introductory letter
to the oflicer in charge of tht>' Bharatpur Sunctuary
so that we could contact him and obtain various dc-tails of the s~tr1ctuary. May I request you kindly to
furni!\h us this information at' your earliest convenience"
J woultl also take this opportunity to express our
sinccrc_ -thanks for the keen interest you have shown
in our_~lclivifics.
Trusting that this will find you in good health and
with kind regards.
P.S: I am sending herewith a brief note on the clarifications/information that was brought out during your discussi~ll with the Chairman in respect of the ~mti-ponution measures that are
beirtg taken at Mathura Refinery, which, I trust,
you will find useful.

End; As ahovc.

COpy OF ANNEXVRE:CLARIFlCATONS/INFORMATION BROUGHT OUT DURING THE DISCUSSiON WITH DR. S. V ARAOARAJAN, CHAIRMAN, EXPERT COMMITTEE
ON
EI~VIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF MATHURA REFINERY ON J ITH AUGUST, 1?77.

1. There is sufficient technqlog!cal development
and know-how availabJe to ensure' that the etUuents
discharged by the refinery to the atmosphere are
within the limits stated by 10C, viz. SO t being ress
than OtiC tonne per hour. Equipments are avaiJable
and w,)uld be instafled for monitoring discharge of
wind puttcrn is such that it is away from Bharatpur
effiuefltf; as well as for measuring the air quality at
various distances from the Refinery. The general
most of the time and therefore the carry over to SO t
to this area will be negligible.
2. The Indian Standards Institution is considering
a draft Slandard for 'I'le air quality. As pcr this the
annual long-term concentration of sulphur dioxide
permitted for urban areas is of the order of 40 micrograms/M:t as compared to 60 micrograms/M:t as specified by \V,H.O. It ~hould, however, be noted that
in indus,trially uevcToped countries, at-though the
limit has been specified as 60 micrograms/M\ the

Copenhagen
Stockholm
Amsterdam
Liege
Brussels
Paris
London, City
London, greater
Milan
Venice, city
Venice, Industrial Area
New York-ManahaUan
New York-Richmond
Los Angeles
Toronto, city
Toronto, residential

60
70
80
130
170
t 10

250
150

600
70
130

110
50
70
170
30

The actuat concentration of sufphur dioxide at
Agra and 'Bharatpur, even after taking into account
the contribution trom the refinery, is far lower than
the figure of concentration being attempted at in
other countries.
3. As mentioned by both the Nature Conservancy
Council (UK) and the Royal Society for 'the Protection of Birds (UK) the effect of sulphur dioxide on
birds will be nil. Howevcr, it hus been stated that
water cflluents could eUect the plant life and consequently effect the bird sanctuary. The water e,fiIuents
from the refincry would be tre<lted to meet the stringent specifications hlid down by the Indian Standards
lnstitution for discharge of trealed effiuents into in·
land waters which are being used for domestic consumption after usual municipal treatment. In al1Y
case~ the effluent from the refinery will be discharged
into the Yamuna river downstream of Brahmandghat
and therefore there is no likelihood of the.same reach.
jng Bharatpur Sanctuary. None the less, a detailed
study of the water courses around the refinery and
Bharatpur will be made to ensure that there is no
likelihood of the refinery's treated effluents reaching
Bharatpur under any circumstances.

COpy OF TilE RErLY RECEIVED FROM DR. SALIM

Au,

PRESIDENT, BOMBAY NATURAL HISTORY SocIETY,

14TH SEPT. '77
Thank you for your 1etter dated 12th September
and the note on nly recent discussion with the Chairman, Expert Committee On Envjropmental Impact
of Mathura Refinery, on the Bird Sanctuary at Bharatpur. The best people to inform you about the steps
taken in the U.K. to keeD the waters of bird sanctuaries free from industrial wastes and chemical polJutants would be The Nature Conservancy Council
and the Royal Socicty for the Protection of Birds,
with whom you are aln"dy in touch. I am sure they
BOMBAY-DT.

