ABSTRACT
A major leakage of toxic gases took place on the night of 2/3
December, 1984 at the Union Carbide Factory in Bhopal from a buried stainless steel tank in which fortytwo tonnes of liquid methyl isocyanate (MIC)
had been stored from October, 1984, resulting in loss of human life and
injuries to thousands.

Damages occurred to animals and plants.

A further

quantity of MIC in a second buried tank presented a serious hazard.

Based

on an appreciation of the chemical reactivity and properties of MIC, a number
of measures were adopted to minimise the recurrence of another leakage
and to contain the effects of such an eventuality. A risk management system
was established and the material in the tank and in other containers was
processed safely during 16th to 22nd December, 1984.
MIC reacts with itself and polymerises readily with explosive
violence, especially under the influence of trace amounts of metallic catalyst
contaminants.

Commercial MIC is stated to be stabilised by the presence

of a few hundreds parts per million of phosgene.

Water also reacts with

MIC, generating heat in proportion to the quantity of water.

Heats of rection

from polymerisation or with water raise temperature resulting in conversion
of un reacted MIC into a vapour or gas.

An examination of several samples

of residues removed from different sections of the tank from which leakage
occurred has established the presence of over twelve chemical entities.
These include MIC-Trimer

(MICT~

methyl ureas (DMU,

TMU~

trimethyl

biuret (TMB~ dimethyl isocyanurate '( DMI~ a cyclic dione (DIONE~ and mono,
di and trimethyl amines (MMA, DMA, TMA ~ besides large amounts of chloride
and some amounts of sodium, iron, chromium and nickel salts.

The relative

proportions of all materials have been determined and the quantities present
in the residue in tank 610, assuming they total 12.5 tonnes.
In order to determine the conditions of formation of the chemical
entities found in the residue of tank 610, a large number of experiments
on the

transformation of

MIC

from

tank 611

have been carried out in

open and sealed containers at different temperatures. These include heating
MIC alone
chloroform.

or reacting it in presence of water, traces of ferric salts, and
The residues have been analysed in each case.

It is shown

that all products found in the residues of tank 610, with the exception

