~

ii :of DMI, DIONE and methylated amines (MMA, DMA, TMA) are found when
C
MIC is heated in stainless steel closed tubes to temperatures upto 200 G

with water and trace amount of ferric chloride. The formation of others
rquire temperatures above 200 G
C. DIONE is formed only when chloroform
is present in the initial mixture.

The composition of residue in these trials

in closest to that found in the residue of tank 610, when the sealed tube
reaction mixture has been heated to 220°C - 250°C.

It has also been shown

that DMU and TMB which are products of reaction of MIC with water below
20QGC, can be transformed to MICT, DMI, DIONE and Methylated A mines
in further reactions in which MIC, trace metal and chloroform are involved.
From a study of these chemical transformations and quantities of products
found in the residue in tank 610, it is possible to arrive at a total materials
balance.

It is thus estimated that 12,087 kilograms of &tIC and 595 kilograms

of chloroform reacted with 512 kilograms of water to produce the residue
containing 6,964 kg. of MICT, 2,675 kg. DMI, 391 kg. DIONE, 161 kg. DMU,
117 kg. TMB, 191 kg. TMU, 246 kg. DMA, 129 kg. MMA 'and 423 kg. TMA
as well as 177 kg. of chloride.

This represents in part the chloride and fully

all other materials in the residue of tank 610.

From the products found

in the residue, the calculated amount of heats of. chemical reactions and
the extent of bulging of the ex humed tank, it is surmised that the temperature
in the tank rose above 250°C at the time of the accident. It has been observed,
in preliminary laboratory experiments that pure MIC, made by a route- which
does not involve phosgene or chloroform, when subjected to heatirg to 300 G
C
produces small amounts of hydrogen cyanide.
hydrogen cyanide formation is not found.

In the presence of chloroform,
Further experiments at higher

temperatures are planned.
A detailed analysis of the features of design of the plant has
been made together with the characteristics of MIC.

with traces of metallic

impurities~

MIC, when contaminated

which act as catalysts, undergoes a violent

polymerisation, and the heat generated can volatilise a large proportion
of MIC.

The gas is highly toxic on inhalation.

Use of iron, steel, aluminium,

zin::, galvanised iron, tin, copper are prohibited from use in areas where
MIC can come in contact.

Commercially produced MIC contains phosgene

which according to Union Carbide, acts as inhibitor of polymerisation.

It

is estimated that ingress of a few Htres of water would lead to the elimination
of phosgene and hydrolysable chlorides and produce hydrochloric acid which

in turn can produce metallic impurities by reaction with the tank.

