iii )
There are no facilities for collecting MIC produced separately
in each shift and the material is directly led into the storage tanks without
batchwise analysis.

There are no on-line analysers. Similarly, nitrogen from

a neighbouring factory is fed directly into the storage tanks, without full
intermediate storage and quality determination.

Carbon steel sections are

used in the connectors to the storage tanks. Copper tubes are used in connectors to the level instruments of the tank.

The system of instruments for

alarm to indicate sudden increase in temperature are not suited
cOi"lditions of operation.

to the

Only a single refrigeration system for cooling of

MIC in two tanks was installed and it had not been operated for some- consi.,.
derable time.
MIC has the combination of properties of very high reactivity
with minimum contaminants, ready volatility to become gas and very high
inhalation toxicity.

The installed facilities provided for disposaJ of unstable

liquid MIC in alkali or for the neutralisation of gaseous emissions from violent
reaction, on examination are found to be not capable of meeting the objectives of such disposal in a very short time of two hours.
The ingress of about 500 kg. of water alone, without metallic
contaminants, would have led to a reaction with three to four tonnes of
MIC and gradual rise in temperature to 70°C, below the boiling point of
MIC at the safety valve pressure. Thte very rapid explosive rise in tem;>erature
and pressure in

th.~

tank 610, implies conditions for a run-away trimerisation

reaction already existed.

Ingress of water and reaction with \HC would

generate carlxndiodde evolutioo and cause mixing.

The storage tank conditions

would then equal those in a well mixed reactor, supplied with heat.

Once

initiated, the trimerisation reaction had features of auto-catalytic and autothermal reactions and temperatures increased rapidly to 250°C.

The relief

valve design could not permit free flow of large quantities of gases at the
level at which they were generated and therefore further reactions continued.
The presence of sodium ;;It levels of 50 to 90 ppm .in the samples
from residues of tank 610 indicates

Bwess

of

&Jre

alkali, possibly derived

from tre Vent Gas Scrubber Accumulator. h is krawn that tre tank 610 could
not be pressurised with nitrogen at any time after 22 October, 1984.
contents
providing

The

of tank 610 were virtually at atmospheric pressure from that date
opportunities

for

entry

of

me t a I con t ami nan t s. From

a

