1.0

INTRODUCTION
The leakage of a large quantity of hlghly tox lC gas from a

buried ta.-.k in which Methyl Isocyanate was stored at the Unton Carblde
plant at Bhopal on the night of 2/3 December, 1984, led to the trag.:
loss of life and to senous damage and disabillties of thousands of people.
This is the worst tragedy

10

the history of chemical industry.

1\ further

quantity of methyl isocyanate present at that time in another adjacent
tank represented a senous hazard of a further leakage.

Through a careful

scientific reVIew of the possible causes of the leakage, resulting from

a violent chemIcal reaction and the identIfIcation of probable circumsatnces
and origins of such an event, a number of measures were adopted to prevent

a recurrence of such an explosive reaction.

The Methyl Isocyanate was

processed safely under 'Operat10n FaIth'.

A scientific' study of the chemical nature and reactions of
Methyl Isocyanate, the features of the faCIlities and controls for its manufacture, storage, utilisation and disposal together with full examinatlon
of the buried tank and Its constituents prOVides basls for outlining the
factors and circumstances which led to the violent chemical transformations
and .rapid leakage of tox ic gas.

The results of such a study are presented

in the Report.

1.1

The Bhopal Pesticides Plant
a facility for the manufacture

Union Carbide has established

of Sevin (Carbaryl) and its formulations in their plant at Bhopal in India.
From late 1977, Sevin was manufactured by usmg imported primary raw
materials, viz .. alpha-naphthol and methyl isocyanate (MIC). The MIC which

was imported was made in Union Carbide's MIC plant in USA and shipped
in stainless steel drums.

However, from early 1980, MIC was manufactured

in the Bhopal plant using the know-how and baSIC deSIgns suppbed by Union
Carbide Corporation, USA (UCC ~
The plant at Bhopal also produced carbon monox ide and phosgene

as intermediates required for the production of MIC.
The manufacturing

process for Sevm involves the reaCtion of

a slight excess of alpha-naphthol WIth MIC in the presence of a catalyst
in carbon tetrachloride solvent.
was

The know-how for the manufact~re of SeVin

provided by UCC.

1

