Phosgene and MMA are reacted in vapour phase to give MCC.
The reaction products are then qlllenched in chloroform and fed to Phosgene
Stripping StiU (PSS). Unreacted phosgene is removed

jJn

PSS and recycled.

The bottoms from PSS are fed to the pyroJyser wherre MCC is pyroJysed
to give MIC and HC} and MIC and HCJ are separated. The pyroJyser condenser
feeds the MIC Refining StiH (MRS).

In MRS, the MIC is separated from

the chloroform in the upper part al1d is led directly into the storage tanks.

The bottoms of MRS are recycled to the process. The He! formed

J5

scrubbed

with chloroform and extracted with water to produce aqueous HC!. Aqueous
HC) is disposed off by neutralisation in a litre pit.

1.1.2

MIC storage system
MIC storage system comprises three horizontal mounded 15,000

gallon (57 M 3 ) tanks and are designated as E-610, E-611 and

E-6~9. Normally

two of the three storage tanks are used to store the product of acceptable
quality and the third tank is used for temporary storage of off-specification
material. GeneraUYI off-specification mate~laJ

IS

The two tanks can hold about 90 tonnes of MJC

reprocessed.
whi~h

can cater to about

30 days of production of Sevin using the stored MIC.
The tanks are made out of 55 304/55 316, with nominal Olarneu::1
of 2400 mm (8 feet) and nominal length of 12000 mm (40 feet).
2
o
designed for full vaccum to 2.72 kg/cm g (40 psig) at 121 C.

They are

The schematic layout of the three MIC storage tanks with common
headers is shown in Figure 1.1

MIC from MR5 condenser in the MIC pro-

duction facility (MIC structure) is led by a long common line of stainless
steel to the MIC storage tank area and then branches off just before entry
to the individual storage tanks.
MIC is to be stored under high purity nitrogen pressure.

The

nitrogen is suppJied to the storage tanks by a common header of carbon
steel.

Excess nitrogen from individual tanks is taken to a·50 mm (2") common

Process Vent Header (PVH) of carbon steel.

Similarly, the discharges from

Safety Relief Valves (SRV) of indiVidual storage tanks are also taken to
a common 100 mm (4") Relief Valve Vent Header (RVVH) of carbon steel.
The tank side PVH and RVVH are interconnected.
The transfer of MIC from the storage talJlks to the

SeVin

UOlt

is also through a common line.

The instrumentation and control system provided for mdividual
MIC storage tanks is shown in Figure 1.2.

3

