MIC stored in the storage tanks is to be kept under an atmos-

phere of High Purity (HP) nitrogen. The recommended nitrogen pressure
2
in the tanks is of the order of 1.0 kg/cm g. The -tank pressure is indicated
locally in the field as well as in the control room and controUed remotely
from the control room by means of a pressure indicating controUer.

HP

nitrogen is admitted into the tank through a make up control valve (make
up DMV ~ the body material of which is carbon steel.

In case the pressure

is higher than the desired value, nitrogen is vented out into PVH through
blow down control valve (blow down DMV ~ the body material of which is
again carbon steel.
Each of the MIC storage tanks is provided with a temperature
transmitter on the tank which indicates the temperature of MIC locally
in the field as well as remotely in the control room.

A high temperature

alarm is provided to alert the operator in the control room in case the temperature of MIC in the tank rises beyond the desired limit.
Each MIC storage tank is provided with a level transmitter to
indicate the level of MIC in the tank.

Nitrogen from Gas Blow Back Header

(G BBH) is purged through MIC in the tank and the level is measured with
back pressure. High and low level alarms are provided.
SRV is provided on eacti MIC storage tank.

A graphite Rupture

Disc (RD) is located on the pipeline between the tank and the SRV. There
is a local pressure gauge provided in between the RD and the SRV. This
would normally-indicate atmospheric pressure. A rise in pressure would indicate
failure of the RD. Failure of RD can be detected only througt" frequent
inspection at the site of the tank. The outlet of SR V is of 100 mm (4 II) nominal
diameter. Three outlets from three tanks are connected to a single common
RVVH, which has 100 mm (4") nominal diameter.
A common line designed as MIC reject line is provided from

the MIC storage tanks to send any off-specification material back to the
MIC plant for reprocessing or to send any contaminated/off specification
MIC to Vent Gas Scrubber (VG S~ where it is neutralised with- caustic soJution.

1.1.3

Vent gas scrubber :
The

V~nt

Gas Scrubber (VG S) meant to neutralise the toxic

exhausts from the MIC plant and storage system consists of three sections.
The upper section of 16.50 mm diameter (.5 •.5 feet) and .5540 mm (18.' feet)

height ;s packed up to a height of 4200 mm (14 feet) with ceramic Berl
saddLes. The middle section below the packing is of 1650 mm (5.5 feet) diameter

and

2100 mm (7 feet) height.

The third section
8

comprises

an

