but it could not be pressunsed. In the meantime, alternative system for
pressurismg tank 611 was made and then ~t could be pre!)~un~cd. Transfer
of MIC to the Sevin unit was then contmued from the tank 611.
In the second shih of 1st December (14.45 hours to 22.45 hours)
attempts were made once agam to pressurise tank 610.

However, this could

not be accomplished to any significant extent. No further eUorts to pressurlse
tank 610 were made.
On 2nd December, the ftrst leak of MIC was noticed

at 23.30

hours 8\ the MIC structure area (M1C production {acihty) near VG S.

The

operators on the ground level in this area Initially noticed some dlrty water
spllling from a higher level in the MIC structure. They also felt the presence
of MIC in the atmosphere due to irntatlon of their eyes. They went up
the stairs in the MIC structure and nottced that MIC and dirty water were
corning out of a branch of R V VH on the downstream Side of regeneration
gas cooler Pressure Safety Valve (PSV ~ They also noticed that the PSV had
been removed and the open end of RVVH branch hne was not blinded. Around
00.00 hours on 3rd December, the operators went to the controt room and

mformed the plant superintendent and the superv!sor that there was atl MIC
leak. They were advised to spray water around the polnt of !eaka&e.
A t around 00.15 hours, when the control room operator

was

mformed of the MIC leakage, he observed on the Pressure IndIcator (PI)
1n the controJ room that the pressure m the tank 610 was shootlng up and

it was in the range of 25 - 30 pSlg.
Between 00.1.5 and 00.30 hours, PI of tank showed a reading
beyond the maximum of the scale, i.e. higher than 55 pSlg.
The control room operator went to the storage area and heard a

hissing sound from the Safety Rehef Valve (SRV) downstream line, implying
that SRV had popped off.

He also noticed that the local temperature and

pressure transmitters on the tank were mdicating beyond their ranges (l.e •
0

... 25 C and 55 psig).

At this pomt, the operator rushed back to the control room and
started the VG S circulation pump from the control room.

He, however,

observed that the flow md,cator In the control room did not show any circu-

lation of the caustic soda solution through VG S. In the meantime, a &a$eous
12

