1.3

'Operation Faith'
Dr. S. Varadarajan, Director General (DG

~

and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Secretary to the

Council of Scientific
Govern.1\t~nt

of India,

reached Bhopal on 5th December, 1984, and was asked to coordinate all
scientific efforts at Bhopal in relation to the situation foHowing the leakage
of tOXlC material. On his instructions, issued on 4th December, 1984, teams
of SCIentists and technologists with expertlse

10

environmental protection

and toxicology for examination of the environment, reached Bhopal in the
afternoon on 5th December, 1984 and assembled at the Regional Research
Laboratory of CSIR at Bhopal.
The teams made an

examinatio~

of the environment immediately

to ascertain if the presence of any isocyante or other related materials
could be detected in air, water or surfaces.

They also recorded observatipns

on any visible damages in the environment such as changes in green plants,
trees aquatic Hfe in the lake and the condition of animal and human population.
Large number

of people and animais had died by that time.

Very large

numbers of persons had serious irritation in eyes and breathing difficulties.
The tests carried out did not show any presence- of MIC or related toxic
materials in the environment. Government authorities were advised accordingly.
Public were advised to wash aU vegetables and food articles with water
and clean floors, walls and sufaces with water.

These tests, coHection of

material and observations were continued in the next fortnight.

Facilities

for detection of specific toxic gaseous materials in a number of locations
were established.
During the visit to the Union Carbide Plant on the morning of
5th December, 1984, the factory management provided

Dr. Varadarajan

a brief account of the gas leakage, the nature of facilities for storage of
MIC and the associated controls.

Visits to the MIC plant, storage area,

the Sevin plant and VGS were made.

At this stage, Dr. Varadarajan° was

informed that bulk quantities of MIC were stored in tanks E-610 and E-611
and the toxic gas leakage had taken place from tank E-610. It was estimated
about 15 tonnes of MIC were present in tank E-611.
tanks was

The material in both

from MIC production in October, 1984 and part of the material

14

