Reliable communication systems.
Mobihsatlon of

experienced scientists, technologists for

varous aCitlvities.
Institution and coordination of all scientific efforts and
establishment of an organisation.
CoUection of samples, data for

current needs and

future studies on the nature of injunes and damage
to hie systems and environment, to allow for
therapy, rehabilitation.
The first task, on the morning of 5th December, 1984 at the
factory of Union Carbide was the estimation of probability of further leakage.
Material from product1on was fed from a common MIC distillation unit directly,
without any intermediate day or shift storage into the tanks 610 and 611
through a common pipehne.

Similarly, nitrogen from a common header

was supplied without storage through a pipehne to the tanks. There was
no reason to believe that the hazard from material in tank 611 was In any
way different from that in tank 610.

The rapid rise an temperature and

pressure observed during the night of 2/3 December from tank 610 and the
inadequacy of VGS to contain large releases, confirmed that any onset of
raction in material in tank 61 I would lead to a rapId explosl"e release of
toxic gases again and a repetition of the event of 2/3 December, 19".

In the discussion, on the morning of 5th December, 1984, between

Dr. Varadarajell (\ Factory Management, it was concluded that MIC can react
with water and the heat generated by reaction of about 4096 of material
would enable evaporation and expelling of remaining MIC as gas.

About

1..5 to 2.,5 tonnes of water would have been involved in the reaction in tank
610.

Polymerisation or trimerisation of MIC could be Initiated by traces

of metal ions.

In such an event, a third of the material undetgoang reaction

could produce sufficient heat to e::peJ

remaining material as

ga~..

It was

assumed at that time, following generation of heat by reaction with water
or by catalysed polymerisation, temperature of liqUid would n5e to S oOe,
the boiling point of MIC at 40 psig.

The pressure generated by gaseous

MIC as well as carbon dioxide, if any, would lead to a rupture of the graphIte
disc (RD) and Jifting of the Safety Release Valve (SR V) and release of gas.

16

