Depending on the rate of reactIon, there would be further release of gas.
It was then assumed that the pIpelines/valves would have permitted free

flow of gases without any obstruction through RVVH.
During further discussions on the evening of 5th December, a
UCC brochure on MIC was made available, and it was stated that while pure
MIC undergoes trimerisatIon, r\n exothermic reaction, without catalyst, commercial MIC of UCC does not.

Phosgene present in MIC at a Ie-vel of about

400 opm acts as an inhibitor of such polymerisation and a minimum of 200
ppm of phosgene was required to ensure stability against polymerisation.
These levels were prescribed by UCC in the specifications for control of
of quality of MIC.

Phosgene was

rout~ly

estimated in MIC samples drawn

from the outlet of MIC distillation unit leading to the MIC storage tanks.
Such estimation of phosgene content was also made on each occasion when
material from tanks was transferred to the Sevin unit. Phosgene was estimated
by methods prescribed by UCC.

This involved the addition of water to MIC,

immediate liberation of hydrogen chloride from phosgene and estimation of
the amount of hydrogen chloride by titration with alkali.

:\ further modifica-

tion involved addition of sodium iodide solution to MIC and estimation of
iodine liberation by titration with sodium thiosuiphate.

The modified method

was used only when abnormally high values for phosgene content -were obtaine<.t.
These procedures were examined by Dr. Varadarajan on the morning
of 7th December, 1984.

He concluded that water couid react readily with

phosgene as well as rnethylcarbamoyl chloride (MCC) present to give Hel.
In the method involving alkali titration, the total of phosgene --and MCC
be estimated.

C.:''l

Similarly, in the second method also, while phosgene may

liberate iodine quickly, the Hel formed from
-hydrogen iodide and iodine by air oxidation.

M.:C

would

also produce

It would not be possible to esti-

mate phosgene levels reliably by eithpr procedure.

Thj~

was expenmentaHy

verified in the Factory on the morning of 7th December, through estimations
carried out by addItion of specific amounts of Hel to MIC.

In diSCUSSIons

with Factory Management, it was ag...eed that any water entering the material
stored in MIC tanks, would react first with phosgene and MCC, and produce
HCi.

Reaction of water WIth MlC to produce Dimethyl Urea (DMU) or Tri-

Methyl Biuret {TMB) IS much slower than the r-eaction of water with phosgene

11

