iii.

Safeguards for containment in the event of onset of reaction

The number of personnel in the factory was reduced to

a minimum.

Entry into the surrounding area was restricted.

About 80,000 persons iivJng

in relatively open structures were

evacuated to safe places. A 11 educational institutions were closed.
An alarm system was established by the Government to alert
the public of any imminent leakage. The public were advised
to go into dosed buildings when an alert was sounded and use
wet towels on their faces to filter air for breathing.
Within the factory, the VG S was kept in operation all
the time.

This was a departure from earlier factory practice

by which VG S was shut down when MIC production stopped.
The

flare

system

was also continuously operated, which was

also a departure from earlier practice.
Adequate large alkali supplies were mobilised to meet
needs of neutralisation.

It was realised that maximum cpntact

with water should be established for any gases escaping from
the top level VG S outlet. Hence the top of the stack open to
atmosphere was cut and new pipes were welded on so that the
gas outlet would be in a large cubical structure surrounded by
a wet cloth tent.

Water was sprayed on to this tent to ensure

gaseous material contact water.

Helicopters andl small aircraft

were mobilised and equipped to dump tonne quantities of water
on to this outlet area.

Fire hydrant hoses were positioned to

spray water. In the entire factory waH perimeter, high level
stands fitted with fixed cloth covers were erected and the cloth
kept wet so that any leakage would pass on to the moist surface.
The surface roads and areas outside the factory were also covered

with water Sj)rays.

jy.

Stabilisation of MIC
The possibility of adding a quantity of phosgene into MIC

in tank 611

was considered. Phosgene cylinders were brought

in from various sources and a purifIcation system was also esta-

blished. However, since other steps made progre'is, this method
was not pursued.
20

