risk management control organisation.

A dditionaJ safety equip-

ments such as air breathing packs and helmets had to be
procured.

Water

spray systems for

extensive coverage had

to be brought to position.
v~

Processing

systems.

In addition, chemicals such as alpha-naphthol, solvents

of

MIC

required

pre-checking

of

all

and alkaJi had to be brought from distant locations in the
country in adequate quantities and tested.

Operators of Union

Carbide and of Nitrogen Factory had to be located and brought
back to function and given instruction and training to work

under unusual conditions and to deal with any untoward emergencies.

Reviews needed to be carried out and a total strategy

for disposal of material had to be outlined.

A large number

of personnel in and outside the factory had to obtain fuU

•

appreciation of aU actions to be taken under different circumstances that may emerge.
Based on these, it was decided not to embark on processing
and djsposal of MIC in tank 611 from 7th December, 1984, and postpone
such operations to a later date, after aU reViews, modifications and arrangements had been completed.

A H concerned, after fuU discussions, agreed

with this approach.
For purposes of reaction 'of MIC with alpha-naphthol, a complete
detailed system of organisation and review was established. Samples of
alpha-naphthol and solvents were

brou~ht

in. AU systems were thorougly

checked and detailed written procedures were i5sued. Wireless communication
systems were established for constant contact with control ceUs in the
Factory and at the State Secretariat. Special communication tele- links
and hot-lines with Delhi and other centres enabled the mobilisation of
materials, equipment, personnel. A number of senior scientists and technologists from

research organisations and major chemical manufacturing

units were involved in review and checks and control of operations. Seniormost officials of the Government of India and the Madhya Pradesh Government provided facilities and assistance for all these activities, and helped

22

