2.0

EXAMINATION OF TANK 610 AND ITS CONTENTS:

In order to have an appreciation of the event, it was necessary
to examine the tank, its associated piping and valves, samples of materials
that colJected in the pipelines and valves, and finally the residue remaining
in tank 610.
On December 20, 1984, the line attached to the safety relief

valve was disconnected and it was noted that the rupture disc which had
broken had some solid material collected around it.

A sample of this solid

was colJected from the rupture disc downstream of the spool piece and
analysed.

It was found to be essentially pure MIC trimer (MICT) which must

have sublimed from the tank and colJected there. Samples were aJso collected
from the tank bottom using a stainless steel pipe as a drilJ core through
the safety valve nozzle, and analysed.

In February

1985, it was planned

to take additional residue samples for further analysis.

an absolute pressure of 160 mm Hg.

The tank was at

Nitrogen was first admitted to the

tank to bring the pressure to normal level before opening the nozzles.

All

the 5 nozzles located on the manhole cover were opened one after anotherand the core samples WIthdrawn.

;his set of samples was also analysed.

During March 1985, the concrete mound over the tank, which
had already cracked during the event, was removed and excavation work
around the tank completed to provide access to and enable inspection of
the ex ternal wall of the tank.

It was decided to cut windows at specific

points on the tank

wall and examine the metal as well as samples of the residue
the length of the tank.

throughout

In April 1985, tank 610 was evacuated first and

then purged with nitrogen to remove volatiles and minimise odour.

Plates

were then cut at predetermined points and through these window holes samples
of the residue were removed for analysis.

Pieces of the metal plates were

also subjected to physical and chemical analysis.
2.1.

Sampling

2.1.1.

Core samples from the manhole nozzle :
All the five

nozzle~

located on the manhole cover were opened

one after another and core samples were drawn (see Figure 2.1 ~
24

A pipe

