The samples of MIC from tank 611 had been collected in 200
ml capacity pressure bottles closed by spring-loaded baH valves.
contained about 125 to 150 ml of MIC.
for specification tests.

Each bottle

The samples were then analysed

The MIC in tank 611 was as per the required speci-

fication and the data are given in Table 2.2.

2.1.5.

Metal pieces cut from Tank 610:
In April 1985, a team of experts examined the tank.

The surface

was found to be coated with bitumen with nylon fibre reinforcements.
bituminous layer was removed and examined.
of steel stiffening rings welded all around.
between the stiffening rings.
pressures.

The tank had six numbers

The tank had bulged significantly

The nature bf the bulges indicated high internal

Several pieces were cut out from tank 610.
shown in Figure 2.2.

The locations are

A round piece of metal (28 cm diameter) was cut

out from the dished end away from the manhole (WA).
cut out from locations WB, WC, WD and WE.
graphed.

The

Square pieces were

All metal pieces were photo-

Physical examination of the pieces showed a blackish coating on

the inside surface.

The metal pieces cut out from the sides nearer to the

residue levels showed deposits due to sublimation.

The top portion of the

tank (inside) showed only thin blackish deposits or sublimates.
through a microscope indicated crystals in the deposits.

Examination

Metal pieces cut

out from the sides or lower portions of the tank showed comparatively higher
amounts of deposits.
2.2

Chemical Analysis

2.2.1

Physical appearance of samples of residue :
All the samples from tank 610 were thicle. semi-solid in consistency,

and brownish in colour.

The samples tended to absorb moisture on exposure

to air and had the smell of amines.

The consJstency of the bottom portion

was quite different from that of the top.

The top portion of the residue

appeared to be dark brown and was more hygroscopic and liquid-like in nature.
The bottom portion appeared to conSJst of a high percentage of crystalline

compound and was light in colour.

28

