2.2.2.

Solubility Characteristics :

The solubility characteristics of the samples were studied initially
for developing the analytical methods.
70 to 8.596 of the samples.
the samples.

Chloroform and acetone dissolved

Hot toluene also dissolved a major portion of

On cooling the toluene extracts, crystals separated and were

identified as dimethylisocyanuric acid.

Water was also found to dissolve

the sample, but complete dissolution required large quantities of water.

2.2.3.

Qualitative Analysis :
Smell: The samples showed a strong smell of amines.

Acidity or alkalinity: The samples were highly acidic.
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC):

TLC carried out on silica

gel indicated the presence of about 15 compounds.

These were

later identified by spotting standard compounds on the TLC plates.
Residue samples indicated positive tests for

Chloride ions :

chloride ions.
Metal ions

:

The residue after treatment with hydrochloric

acid was tested for metal ions.

Positive tests were obtained

for the following metallic ions: iron, nick.e,b chromium and molybdenum
Cyanide ions :

2.2A.

Residue sample showed negative test for cyanide ions.

Analytical Procedures:

Different techniques were employed for the quantitative estimation
of compounds in the samples.

The organic compounds were determined by

gas liquid chromatography (GLC).

Except for the amines, all the organic

compounds could be well separated on FFAP column or other columns as
detailed in Annexure 2.

Acetone was used as the solvent for the analysis.

It was found that acetone in presence of dimethyl-amine (296) dissolved about
9596 of the residue.

The acetone insoluble

metal chlorides (approximately 196).
identified organic compounds.

(approximately 3-696) showed

It did not contain amines or other

The amines could be separated using a TEPA +

KOH column on chromosorb 102.

Most of the compounds were isolated from

the residue using various techniques and their identity established by spectral

data OR, NMR and MS) by direct comparison with those of pure compounds.
29

