vi.

A part of the chlorine of chloroform is converted to hydrogen
chloride.

The hydrogen chlonde produced is present in part

as hydrochloride of amines and as metal chlorides.
3.3.1

Material Balance
Based on the chemical reactions described above, a material balance

has been worked out to give the water required for these reactions and the MIC
that was used up. These are given in Table 3.2.
Approximately 512 kg. of water and 12.0 tonnes of MIC were used
up. About 80 kg. of ammonia and 1.25 tonnes of carbonOloxlde evolved and escaped
from the tank.
3Jf.

Comments
The residue contains iron, chromium

ratio as in stainless steel 304/316.

and nickel, almost in the same

This could be due to corrosion of the material

due to the hydrochloric aCid produced as envisaged

10

the reactions mentioned

earlier.
Sodium is present in the reSIdue to the ex tent of 50-90 ppm. The process
water contains only 15 ppm sodium.

If all the sodium in the residue is to be

accounted from process water only, it had to enter the tank in enormous quantity.
Hence one has to look fot other sources of sodium e.g. alkali solution in the VG S.
The cause of the presence of 20-30 ppm calcium and of 2 ppm magnesium
in the residue, is being investigated.
The exploratory laboratory experiments carried out so far provide sufficient information to enable a logical and plausible scenario to be developed for
the chemical reactions that occured in tank 610.
3.5

Gaseous Products of Reaction of MIC
In the above set of experiments on the chemical transformation of

MIC under different conditions and the analysis of the reSIdue, it was not possible
to collect gaseous products and examine them.

FaCilities for such coHection

of gaseous material are bemg established.
In preHminary experiments, MIC, water and ferric chloride were placed
in a stainless steel tube as described under Annexure 3.1.

The tube was closed

with cap to which was attached a pressure valve and a thtn pIpe..

The valve was

closed and the tube heated to 300°C and mamtamed at the temperature for half
an hour.

The tube was then cooled to -5°e and the end of the pipe was placed
59

