in a known quantity of dilute aqueous alkali.

lhe

valve was opened and

the tube and contents were warmed up to 30째C to volatilise gases and low
boiling materials. The gaseous products were thus trapped in the dilute aqueous
alkali. The aqueous alkali was examined for the presence of cyanide by standard
APHA methods. Cyanide was not detected.
The behaviour of MIC prepared by a different route, namely from

sodium azide and acetyl chloride has been studied. When heated in

sealed

glass tubes to' 300째C and the contents examined, the presence of hydrogen
cyanide in small amounts has been noted.

Under the same conditions, it

has ben found tRat MIC sample from tank 611 does not yield hydrogen cyanide.
It was felt that the chloroform present in the samples from

have an influence on thermal degradation.

tank~

611 may

Therefore, small amounts of

chloroform were added to the chloroform free MIC made through sodium
azide and acetyl chloride route and the material was heated.
hydrogen cyanide could not be detected.

In this case,

It appears chloroform inhibits

the break down of MIC to hydrogen cyanide.. It is also possible that minor
components present in MIC prepared by the sodium azide-acetyl chloride
route may act as activators for formation of hydrogen cyanide.

For such

studies on inhibitors and activators, highly purified MIC is required.

It is

found that highly purified MIC tends to polymerise very readily at room
temperature.

By suitable storage, it is proposed to keep highly purified

MIC non polymerised and then examine the influence of minor additives
to MIC on thermal decomposi.tjon at high temperatures.
MICT, DMI, Dione, DMU and TMB are all products found in the
residue in tank 610.

It has been estimated by detailed calculation that about

.500 kg. of water which had entered the tank, would have reacted with MIC
before the temperature rose to 150째C.

A t temperatures above 200째C, the five

materials listed would be in the main products and

the possibility of these

producing hydrogen cyanide at further higher temperature has been examined.
Weighted amounts (100-150 mg) of each material in sealed glass vials have
been heated for half an hour at 300 o e; the cooled vial placed undr dilute
alkali in standard flasks and the seal broken to release material. The solution
made upt-o 100 ml was analysed for cyanide by standard procedures.

traces could be detected in some cases.

Only

Thus, there seems to be -little or

no formation of cyanide from these five materials even in the absence of

chloroform.

Further detailed work on behaviour at higher temperatures

and on influence of other components is planned.

60

