'.2

Storage Tank
The highly toxic and explosive nature of MIC requires that the

storage system and its related instrumentation/control be of high reliability.
Inspection of MIC storage tanks is difficult, since they are buried.
Tank 610 was reportedly cleaned and inspected in 1982. Varying quantities
of MIC from production runs at difierent periods have been filled into tank
610. Similarly, varying quantities of MIC have been removed at different
periods.
Commercially

produced

the form of phosgene and MCC.

MIC contains hydrolysable chloride in
Ingress of even a small quantity of water

of the order of 40-.50 ml per tonne of MIC, will lead to the reaction of
water with the hydrolysable chloride to provide hydrogen chloride and with
a little more of water, aqueous hydrochloric acid. This leads to corrosion
of stainless steel, the material of construction of the storage tank, leading
to the formation of ferric chloride which can catalyse the violent run-away
reaction.
The Sevin unit could process MIC of the order of 3 to 4 tonnes
per day. The inventory of MIC in the storage tank was of the order of
90 tonnes, equivalent to nearly 30 days production.
It is normal plant practice to have intermediate batch tanks
to hold production from a single shift or for a day.

The product collected

in these tanks is analysed, its quality ensured and then it is transferred to
the bulk storage tank. Such a facility of batch tanks had not been provided.
MIC was directly fed to the bulk storage tanks from MRS witho.Jt any batch
tank.
Alternatively, an online analyser could have monitored continuously
the quality of MIC before it entered the storage tank. An alarm could have
been provided to alert the operator regarding off-quality MIC and enable
him to take quick action to prevent contamination of the bulk storage tank
with off-quality material. There was no provision for such an online analyser I
alarm system.
Water is used as the cooling medium in the multi-tubular MRS
overhead condenser.

Water circulated in the sheH side is at a higher pressure

than the pressure of MIC inside the tubes. Even a pin hole in any (If the
tubes could lead to a small quantity of water entering the MIC make line
which is taken directly to the bulk storage tank.

72

