'.3

Nitrogen :
MIC is kept under a p-esare of nitrogen which is supplied by a carbon

steel header common to all the storage tanks.
nitrogen line.

There is a strainer in the

Subsequent to the strainer the pipe is of carbon steel and

leads to make-up DMV which also has a body of carbon steel.
the blowdown DMV is also of carbon steel body.

Similarly,

These carbon steel parts

may be exposed to MIC vapours and get corroded, providing a source of
contaminant which can enter the MIC storage tank.
The level in MIC tank is measured by purging of nitrogen.

The

~

header supplying this nitrogen' is made of carbon steel and the connection
from the manifold to the level instrument is by a copper tube.

There is

no strainer or filter in this line which can prevent entry of rust or metaHic
particle entering the tank along with nitrogen •
•A

Instrumentation and Control System:

The pressure in the MIC tank increases rapidly if MIC is contaminated with water.

There is no high pressure alarm to alert the operator

about the build-up of pressure.
There is a 'graphite rupture disc between the tank and the safety
valve.

This graphite rupture disc may break because of pressure surges

even under normal conditions.

There is no provision for an alarm to bring

such a breakage of rupture disc to the attention of the operator.
For the storage of a lethal chemical such as MIC, two instruments
in paraJlel (one for control/indication and another for alarm) are normally

provided.

No such provision is made.

For example, quite often the level

readings have not been recorded, reportedly because the level system used
to be out of order very often due to choking problems. In fact, after the
event, since the only level monitoring system provided for tank 611 was
not functioning, it was not possible to ascertain the exact quantity of MIC
in that tank.

An additional level measuring system would have helped

In

such a situation.
Ingress of contaminants or water can start a reaction with MIC

which will begin slowly and produce a rise in temperature of the tank contents.

73

