The quantum of tox ic leakage by violent chemical reaction
is not reJated to the amount of meta! and water which initiate
the reactions but to the quantity of MIC stored in a single
container. If 42 tonnes of MIC had been stored in 210 stainless
steel drums of 200 litre capacity each, as alternative to
a single tank, there would be no possibility of leakage of
more than one fifth of a tonne and effects of even such
a leakage could be minimised by spray of water or alkali.
It has been reported that a large number leakages of MIC
in comparatively smaH quantities have occured from storage
vessels and tanks in Union Carbide.

The causes for such

ieakages have not been made known.

While Union Carbide

product brochure refers to chemical properties and reactivity
of MIC, including possibilities of violent reaction as weB
as of possibilities of spillages from drums and tanks during
transport, no information is provided on the extraordinarily
lethal tox ic effects of inhalation.

PubHc preparedness for

eventualities arising out of leakage would have been substantially greater if information on these had been generally
available.

For instance, substantial care is exercised in the

storage and transport of explosives or in handling even weakly
radioactive materials or in the use of X-ray equipment, due
to the awareness of hazards.
In retrospect, it appears the factors that led to the toxic gas leakage
and its heavy toll existed in the unique properties of very high reactivity,
volatility and inhalation toxicity of MIC. The needless storage of large quantities
of the material in very large size containers for inordinately long periods as
well as insufficient caution in design, in choice of materials of construction
and in provision of measuring and alarm instruments, together with the inadequate
controls on systems of storage and on quality of stored materials as weB as
l.ck of necessary facilities for quick effective disposal of material exhibiting
instability, led to the accident.
practices in operations

(OJ

These factors contributed to guidelines and

maintenance.

Thus the combination of conditions

for the accident were inherent and ex tant. A small input of integrated scientific
analysis of the chemistry, design and controls relevant to the manufacture
would have had an enormously beneficial influence in altering this combination
of conditions, and in avoiding or lessening considerabJy the ex tent of damage
of December, 1984 at Bhopal.

81

