Gist of discussions held on 1/7/82
between BHEL and State Level Advisory
Committee appointed by Government of
Guiarat.

1.

~nteraction

with G.E.B.

The question of better interaction with GEB to ensure
that in the projects under execution and also in future
projects, cordial relationship between GEB and BHEL exists
was discussed in detail.
BHEL stands by its commitment to render the best of
service to the customers and it shall do the best that is
possible to ensure that proper interaction is restored
between BHEL and GEB.
To restore confidence of GEB in our equipment and
services, it was suggested by us that a complete project
may be handed over to us on turn-key basis with stipulation of penalty and aoceptance as was done in the case of
Tripoli and BHEL could prove its ca~ability in such a project.
2.

Problems

ih

BHEL : equipment

The problems in the BHEL supplied equipment in GEE
power stations were discussed in general. It was stated
by us that BHEL was a member of the Task Force,set up
with GEE for analysing the problems and suggesting rectifications. The last deliberations of the Committee took
place in December'81 and most of the issues were settled.
Shri D. Narasimhan, Deputy G~neral Manager who was EHEL's
representative in the Task Force is again nominated for
the same purpose and he along with Shri B.K. Patel, Chief
Engineer, GEB will go over the technical points and suggest solutions.
A meeting was h8ld later in the Projects Division of
Thermal Projects Group in which the Technical Members of
the Committee discussed the p~oblems with our Technical
Experts and a consensus on the methods of tackling the problem was reached.
3.

C&I Deficiencies.

Regarding your observation that the C&I area is not
functioning well, although principally it is ILK's problem, yet we agree to interact with GEE and ILK for evolving solutions to the problems in the C&I area.
4~

§p8f6S.

The progress made by BHEL in supplying spares to power stations was brought out. It was emphasised by BHEL

