-2Gat head office may be formed. The details of the functions of such a group are listed in
c.

pa~a

2.6.1.

Tho annual maintenance of modern power plants including all the instruments and auxiliaries, is bocoming
an increasingly complex task technically and the creation of specialised task forces, which are given rigorous training in maintenance systems requires urgent
attention. Each station should have a group of such
specialised persons who could be deployed on annual
overhauls, preventive maintenance and on forced
outage repairs. Depending upon the size of the Board's
Operations, expensive oquipment or special tools required to attend to major break down and repairs can
be held in a central place either in the State or
the region and used by stations as required. 4.45

The committee feels that a special maintenance task force
should be created to take care of scheduled maintenance.
Experienced personnel from different stations may be used
to constitute such a task force. This task force should
be headed by a Superintending Engineer and may consist of
about 1 to 10 engineers. Although the personnel of the
task force may be distributed among various stations for
their permanent place of posting, it is expected that
they will work together as a team for any scheduled maintenance task.
d.

Although there are many common problems faced by thermal stations the opportunities for engineers, supervisors, specialists and skilled workmen to learn
from each other are very limited. It is recommended
that CEA arrange for exchange of visits between personnel of power stations having similar equipment
and common problems of, say coal quality, and also
organise seminar on various aspects of plant maintenance. The Committee also observes that reports on
subjects which are of direct relevance and interest
to shop floor supervisory technical personnel do not
re3ch them. Such reports should receive the widest
possible circulation amongst the technical officers
of the power industry. 4.46.

