4

(4)

The Group will suggest measures for establishing

meaningful cooperation in a sUbstantial way between the Public
Sector Enterprises and the Nati'nal Laboratories 5n the five areas
mentioned in (1) above

SO

that the National Laboratories are in a

position to make an impact on altering or il proving products
or manufacturing processes.
(5)

In the light of the programmes indicated in the Draft

Science & Technology Plan (1974-79) Prepared by the NCST, the
Group will discuss with the management of public sector units in
the above five areas and help them in identifying the gaps and
suggest action plans along with financial reqUirements.
(6)

The Group may suggest measures to ensure that the

public sector undertakings playa positive role in extending technological assistance to the small entrepreneurs.
3.

The first meeting of the Working Group was held on the

19th August 1974.

It was decided in that meeting that the Chairman

be authorised to collect uptodate information regarding the existing
status and scope of R&D organisations in the five selected industries,
viz., Coal Mines Authority, Steel Authority of India Limited,
Indiap Telephone Industries

Li~ited,

and Bharat Heavy Electricals Llmited.
collected.

Bharat Electronics Limited
This information was accordingly

It was also decided in the first meeting nf the Working

Group that the Group should seek an opportunity to visit some

public enterprises and discuss the matter of promotion of Research,
Design and Development (ROD) with the Chief Executives.

In

accordance with this decision, in a meeting of the ChieF Executives
of the light and medium engineering group of public enterprises held
at Bangalore on 27th and 28th August 1974, the Chairman of the Group,
Dr Varadarajan addressed the Chief Executives on the subject of RDD
activities.

This was followed by a lively discussion amongst the

Chief Executives wherein the Chief Executives expressed a firm
opinion that they should set up their own ROD facilities.

