13

paragraphs with referenC8 to item(1)of the Terms of Reference.
A study of specific problems of

RO~

in specific enterprises would

require jeteiled knowledge of the commercial and t:chnical
operations, competitive market conditions, high level of expertise
in the specific industry and would require a long period of time
and continuous updating.

It is important to recognise that priori-

ties of ROD problems change with time and the process of
identification and of solving ROD problems is a continuous one
and does not submit itself to a one time exercise.

The NeST

Working Group would, therefore, refrain from a detailed study
of specific ROD problems of specific enterprises.
25.

However, the Working Group would like to suggest some

effective institutional arrangements regarding identification
of specific ROO problems on a continued basis.

The ROD activity

should receive attention right from the project formation stage.
In the project report itself appropriate financial

and other

provisions should be made for the necessary ROO inputs so that
repetitive import of technology far upgraded designs does not
become necessary. After the project goes into production, periodical reviews of performance of ROO in each PSE should be conducted
by the parent Ministry.

The review of ROO could form an integral

part of ehe performance review 1,.8oting conducted quarterly by the
Ministries with the PSEs under their administrative control.
In any case, annual review should be conducted by the Ministry
in detail and the perform8nce in ROD should form a part of the
Annual Report of the Ministry.

The Department of Science and

Technology could provide the necessary assistance for coordinating
such reviews and should be represented in the revisw meetings.
TECHNOLOGICAL STANDARDS
26.

The evolution of technological performance standards at each

point in the total manufacturing processes would require long and
detailed technical study of each process and would require to be

