21

1•
:

2.

4.

3.
Development 0f seismic
field techniques in
folded areas.

The project : ~:.l.s been taken up as
priority project No. 14. The required
imported and indigenous equipment and
stores Qre under process of procurement.

Delineati'ln and identifiThe proj ect has been tn.ken up as priocnticn of subtle tra.ps for rity project No. 15. Three seismic
lines, t.Jhich vIera shot across Unauwa
hydrocarbons ( lithology
Well No.1, were n.n:'1lysed with the
oriented interpretatinn
specific objective of delineating the
of geophysical datu).
Uhnuwa sands on the seismic sections.
Development of well log
evalunti on techniqoo s fC'r
heterogenous shally sands
containing fresh water.

The project has been ~~en up as
prinrity project No. 23. ProcureIOOnt
action for tho import equipment
required for the proj oct is :in hand.

Desi go and development of
production logging equipment.

The project hn.s been taken up as
priority project No. 42. Requirement
of imported and indigenous equipnent
and stores is under process of procurement.

Mathematical modelling in
exploration geophysics
(including non-h~mogenous,
nan-isotropio and dissipative media).

The project h~s been taken up as priority project No. 13. In collaborati"n
with University of Roorkee, the following majnr topiCS of invostigatiC'n ~re
under progrcss:i) Stochastic modellmg of stratigraphic sequences.
ii) DeSign and davelopment of filters
for onhc.-m.cing bright spots.
iii) Possibility of the application of
Kalman filter to geophysical dnta
proc os sing.

Study of plvsical proporties and eVD.luati "'n
of logging paramotors on
core srunplos under simulated formation conditions.

-

The project has been taken up as priority project No. 22. Discussi~ns have
been held with !JGRI, Hyderabad, regarding their collaboration in fabricati~n
of pressure cells and asSOCiated pressure-temperature generating and measuring sys toms. TIle NGRI arc yet to
submit their terms and conditi0ns for
the cnllaborntion. Literature survey
~d theoretical studies on tho expected
behaviour of rook properties with
pressure and temperature has been
atteoptod.

