22
ADDITIONAL PROJECTS TAKEN UP BY ONGC WHICH DO NOT
FIGURE III THE DRlJr S&T PIl.lJ 1974-79 OF NCST

SI.No. Title of the Projoct

Remarks

1.

Geophysical survey instrument
(l-1arine/Design and development of marine streamor.)

The project has been taken up as prinrity
project No. 18. The required indigenous/
imported oquip:1ont and stores are under
pr~cess of pr0cuxement.

2.

Ba.semont ma.ppil'lg and deep
seismic sound:ing (ISS) Arabian
Sea., Grolga Valley, Cambny
Bnsin £ll1d part of Himalayas.

Tho project hn.s been tnkcn up as priority
project No. 25. Deep seismic sounding
field work along tho first profile lif
approximate longth of 200 kIns. from Mehruna.dbad to BillimoI'D. in the Crunbay Basin has
boen completed in collaborati0n with NGRI.
The DSS field w0rk along the second profile
Nnvibandnr to l~li of approximate length
of 160 kms. in Sauro.shtrn. hus been completed.

:3 • Ro gi0nnl aeromngnctic survay
CNer the continentnl shelf and

across the continental nnrgins
off West Coast of India.

4.

Geomorphological evaluation
of the Ind in. Coast.

5. SedimentolOgical, geochemical
o.nd microbinfncies study in the
continental sm 1f botween BOooDY
High and offshore of Kutch.

6. Remote Sensing using ERTS
Imageries.

The project n.'l.S been taken up as priority
projact Nn. 24. The project envisages
collabcrati0n with NGRI for carrying out
the survey. Tho land ba.ses for position
location systems lJ:IA have been fixed by
2 survey partics at suitable points along
tho West Crest of India. The COI!lputati"n
of 'the ir procise coordimtes is in progress.
The project ms boon tnken up n.s priority
PMjoot No. 5. :'his projoct is bc:ing
carried out in collaboration with P~nn
UniverSity and J~dhro. U:ri.vcrsity.
Tnc project has been tnkcn up as priority
projcct No.6. The required imported and
indigenous equip:lcnt nnd sto~s nre under
precess 'if procurement. Detailod discussims
with the scientists of NID, Goa on sampling
surveys in the area. of study, a.lignment of
survey cruises, srunpling sites etc. were
held. The NIO agroad to collaborate and
to sbnre hnJ.f' of the cost of tho proposed
surveys and studios.

The project has been tnkcn up as pri0rity
proj oct No.7. The required imported and
indigcncus equipment and stores are under
process of procurement.

