23
List (if rrojccts t3.ken up by Indian Oil Corporntion Ltd.,
at their R&D Centre which arc not idcntifinblc with
Projects listed in drnft S & T Plan 1974-79 of NCST.

Remarks

Sl.No. Title nf the Project

1.
1.

3.

2.
Product Dovclopnent

11 spec ic.-ti oils are under development for varinus
applications. Sane ,.,ther imporiam products under

dovelopment are Fire resistant h~~raulic fluids,
improved metal working (lils, improved untiwear
hydraulic oils, improved groases and some spec ialitics for rUbber/leather industries etc.

3. Technical Service to
Customors.

Assistance to Refineries

& Pipelines Division

5.

11. kerosene wick stove with fl higher thermal
effic iency (60% +) was develope d and is being
produced under ICC licence by M/s Oriental
Metal Industries, C.'1.lcuttn.
Tracks were laid :in various parts 0f India for
the scientific ch~ice of bitumen for durable
and econ0mic pavements in various climates
with different grades of bit~ns prcduced by
Madrns Refinerios and HPC. These tr3.cks are
under periodical observation for assessing
their pcrfornk~ce.

(c)

Product Application
Studies.

(a)

(b)

2.

Various c":)mmercial fuel saving devices mrkoted
were evaluatod in 1m test cars.

ICC is :,roviding techni anI bn.ck-u~ service to their
customers to s~lvo vnriot;E :Jr0bleI!lfi of application.
This has given them an opportunity to develop/
improve some products for specific ap~liCQtinns.
IOC is prnvid:ing assistance to various rofinuries
in qUEuity c antral cf various products. EJalmples
oxe ATF production at Barauni, improved methodS
for evaluation Jf cold flow properties of Diesel
fuels from K:Jy.:lli and Bnr-aun;i..

Improvement of Standards roc is doing this thr0ugh introducticn . . f high
quality pr'Xlucts and by assisting in formulating
of Lubes & Fuels.
improved lSI standards for lubes and fuels incorporating performuncc tests wherever feasible.

6. Dcvolopnent 0 fOils,
particularly those used
in marine service and
metal work:ing
operati 0ns •

IOC has .}ntered intc an agrcenent \-lith Castrol IT.K.
for this purp::> se after field trials in vari,..,us
ships fnr 6 to 12 months. 1m has already obtained
provisional approval ("If four importnnt engine
builders f'"'r their marine oils. The results will be
eVhluatcd by engine Iiltlnuf'acturcrs with a viGW to
give final approval.

