35
STATUS OF PROJECTS IDENTIFIED IN THE DRAFT S & T PLAN
1974-79 OF NeST IN HEAVY ELECTRICALS SECTOR (POWER)

NeST No
1.

Title of the Projoct

Remarks by BHEL

2.

G
1

R&D Task Force

500 MW Prototy pe

BHEL has a time bound programme to manufacture a 500 MW Unit. In the area of steam
turbines and turbo-generators for lerge
size sets, a collaboration has been entered
into with KWU. In some areas such as
Boilers and Heat Exchanger the development
work is being done in-house. A Programme
has also been drawn up for the absorption
of technology from KWU.

S3G1P2(A) R & Projects - Power
Systems - 400 Kv line
and equipment

BHEL is in a position to design and manufacture major equipment like switchgear,
power/instrument transformers for 400 KV
Systems.

5 3G1 P2 (b) R&D Projects - Power
Systems - HVDC line and
equipment

Studies have already been taken up for the
HVOC line and equipment.

R&D Facilities - Expansion - New Ultra HV synthetic testing, training
of power system and
maintonance engineers.
S3G1P3(b) R&D Facilities - Expansion
- New - Steam Turbine development centre, superconducting Dev. Centre for small
and medium scale industries;
on the line computation/
automation, direct energy
conversion.

BHEL has plans for development of equipment
for UHV transmission. In order to design
and test the equi8ment such as transformers
and switchgears a UHV laboratory is being
set up at Bhopal.
eHEL has a developmental centre for steam
turbines, largo and medium utility turbines and industrial turbines.
R&D programmes like twin shell castings
for 210 MW turbines, development of
turbovisory instrumentation, etc. are
in progress.

Product Development ProjoctsR & 0 Projects are in progress for transforLarge transformers, super
mers such as spray resin encapsulated 33 KV
conducting motors, Bulb
current transformer, 20 MVA AI, wouad Transturbines.
former, Development of 5200 KVA Traction
Transformer, etc.
A bulb turbine prototype as a test model is
under manufact'Jre. Designs for a 7.5 MW
bulb turbine for the Western Yamuna Canal
Proj ect is ready.

